---
title: '#840: Bill Gurley â€” Investing in The AI Era, 10 Days in China, and Important
  Life Lessons from Bob Dylan, Jerry Seinfeld, MrBeast, and More'
pub_date: '2025-12-17'
podcast: The Tim Ferriss Show
---

Hello boys and girls ladies and germs. This is Tim Ferriss. Welcome to another episode of the Tim Ferriss show. Where's my job to deconstruct world-class performers? I interview them to tease out the habits, routines, frameworks, etc. that you can apply to your own lives. My guest today is Bill Gurley. He is a general partner at Benchmark, a leading venture capital firm in Silicon Valley. But his venture career, his career overall, spans a lot. He is invested in and served on the boards of such companies. This next door, open table, stitch fix, Uber and Zillow. He earned his bachelor of science degree in computer science from the University of Florida and that is MBA from the University of Texas at Austin. He's had lots of other careers, but we discussed that in our first episode. We're going to cover a lot more on this one. For more than two decades, Bill has written about technology and other subjects on his popular blog above the crowd and on his social media accounts. His new book is Running Down a Dream, How to Thrive in a Career You Actually Love, and we detail exactly what he means by that, including some incredible stories and takeaways that you can apply. You can find him on x at x.com slash b-girley g-u-r-l-e-y and without further ado, please enjoy a very wide-ranging conversation with none other than Bill Gurley.

Bill, great to see you, man. Good to see you. I thought we would start with a prop that you brought. So there was a very thick book, The Tattered Cover, and I think that is as good a lead in as anything. What are you holding? I'm holding a book called The Last Laugh by Phil Berger. The reason is Tattered is I think it may be out of print, like I bought it used because I wanted to see it and have it. What's the subtitle? The Last Laugh, The World of Standup Comics. Why do you have this book? Are you thinking of making a career switch? No, no. So as part of researching my new book, running down a dream, my co-writer and I were, we spent six years just diving through stories, because I had done this speech at the University of Texas and we wanted to enhance it, and when we went to the printed form, and one of the stories we came across was Jerry Seinfeld, and his decision to pursue a career as a comedian. He was in New York. He wasn't sure what he wanted to do with his life. He had an inkling, an inkling that he might want to be a standup comic, but he didn't know what that meant. He didn't know if it was a real career. He didn't know that he could make money. He read this book and it profiles, it looks like 15 different. He's got Woody Allen, Bill Cosby, George Carlin, Lily Towneling, Robert Klein. They profiled them in a way. It was very disinhibiting to him. It gave him permission to go do this career that's not a typical career, right? When you go to college, they don't list standup comedian as something that you can go do. Like the guidance counselors generally put that on the multi-express. Exactly, but this book served as something that granted him permission to go do that. We're going to come back to that. I will say that I bookmarked this for future conversations, and of course we're chatting outside of these recordings, but because two years ago, almost exactly when we did our first episode, you mentioned that you were working on a book idea, based on the belief that it's easier than ever to rise up because access to mentors and information is unprecedented. We'll come back to that, of course, and discuss it, and the frameworks and the approaches and the stories at some length. But I wanted to start with some topical subject matter. AI bubble or not. And if so, what does that mean? Yes, so I think this is a super interesting. My partner, Peter, reminded me of a book that we had seen a while ago by Carlotta Perez. It has this very benign title, Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital. It was written in 2002. And what Perez kind of simplifies and notices, which I just find perfect for trying to understand whether there's a bubble or not, is that every time there's been a technology wave that leads to wealth creation, especially fast wealth creation, that will inherently invite speculators, carpet baggers, interlopers, they want to come take advantage of it, think of the gold rush. And so people want to make it a debate. Do you believe in AI or is it a bubble? And if you say you think it's a bubble, they say, oh, you don't believe in AI, like this got you kind of thing. And if you study Perez, and I think this is absolutely correct. If the wave is real, then you're going to have bubble-like behavior. They come together as a pair, precisely because anytime there's very quick wealth creation, you're going to get a lot of people that want to come try and take advantage of that are participate in it. So you get a flood of those types of people coming at it. It's odd. There's a real technology wave that's fundamentally changing the world. And there's also massive speculation simultaneously. Yeah, they come as a pair. I recall not too long ago, maybe two weeks ago, saw a short interview with your friend, Jeff Bezos. And he distinguished between financial bubbles and industrial bubbles and cited, and I'm paraphrasing here, but 2008, as an example of a bad bubble, financial bubble versus, let's just say, the early 2000s, like 98, 99, 2000, where a lot of very important technology was created, that then was durable after the fact and created new generations of entrepreneurs in a lot of economic growth. And he believes that AI would fall into the industrial bubble category of things. But I suppose, given that the dancing period you described come together, how would you think about investing in private companies, modern venture capital at this point in time? And just I suppose as it's changed since you were most active. Just a quick comment on that industrial bubble thing. You know, one thing that is surprising to me is that even though I fundamentally believe this is an important real technology wave, the big players, even the max seven, have all decided to do things from a deal perspective. You've read about these circular deals and whatnot. Could you explain what you mean by that? Yeah, I mean, there's a lot of talk out there, but it all started when Microsoft invested in OpenAI, OpenAI agreed to buy services from Microsoft, which is called a circular deal, because you're giving a money they wouldn't have otherwise. And when Dario was on stage at Dealbook last week, he said, oh, I can explain this is not that hard. Amazon wanted us to spend money we didn't have so they gave us even more money. And I'm like, well, that's precisely why this is a question of behavior. But it's gotten bigger, you know, and Vitya's handing out money and then Vitya gave core weave money, but then also agreed to buy any services they have left over. This stuff's not ideal. Like if you were say, what's Chris fleeing accounting, you know, you wouldn't do these kind of things. And some of them say, well, it's not material in which I would say, well, then why are you doing it? And I've asked other people to try and understand how even big sophisticated companies might get speculative using a word from the previous discussion. And, you know, I hear things like, well, loss of version tends to go down when you're winning. Like if you're on a hot streak in a casino, you take more risk, things like that. But it is surprising to me. So when it comes to retail investors, I would be particularly concerned for them at this stage in the AI game because there is a plethora of SBV vehicles. You've heard that phrase. I'm sure SBV is just where someone has an in on an investment and they do a one off VC fund if you want a service vehicle. Yeah, it's a single entity. Just for that. To invest in X, we have an allocation of however much money. And then they can allow sort of Jane Doe and John Doe potentially. They take a rake on it. And there's people promoting SBVs in situations where they don't even actually have the underlying stock or maybe they hope to get it. It's the wild, wild West. And most of the people on that edge, I would put in the category of interloper carpet bagger. These are people that have come to this thing. And I just think you got to be quite careful. The investments that were made that have already had 100X plus returns were made a while ago, you know, before this thing started. That's not to say there won't be an incremental AI investment that makes money. I think they will. But your odds right now of that being the case are really, really low. Yeah, I would add to that and say this applies to me as much as anyone else, but your actual risk tolerance may differ, probably does differ significantly from your perceived risk tolerance. If you haven't had a huge drawdown, right? If you haven't actually written a few of those waves and see how you respond in those circumstances. And you should be as skeptical of how you view your own intestinal fortitude with some of those things or maybe the losses you can absorb. It's a rake off, for instance, I've seen this many, many times, but with these types of SBVs, people get involved. And let's just say they're not typically an angel investor. They don't have the experience of watching 60, 70, 80% of their investments go to zero or become the walking dead. And they sign off on all of the, not necessarily waivers, but they accept, accept, accept, on like the SBV terms of service, which I'll say, you could lose all of your investment. This is incredibly risky. But then when it does go to zero, you know, the financial and psychological impact. It is catastrophic. There's a lot of people. And I think this comes from a very good place. I think they're very well intentioned who look at the world and say rising inequality, like why can't everyone have access to the same things and then companies are staying private longer. So they say we need to institutionalize the generic public's ability to invest in private companies. I think there's two problems. One, you just said it at, which is most private company VC back even go to zero, like the majority, which is not something people, they sense that they want the lottery ticket, they want the Uber, they want the one that goes to the moon. But they don't understand that that comes along with it. They don't want to buy losing lottery tickets for 12 years. Right. Right. Exactly. And the second problem is the information transparency in the private company game is just low. And I think the institutional investors have come to understand that and kind of know what they're getting into and know how to evaluate things. But if you come at it with a public market mindset, thinking, oh, every set of financials, I've been handed is audited and is correct. And that's just not the case. It's super lucy, Lucy. So if you were, this may be a difficult question, but if you were angel investing right now, how would you be thinking about your approach? I'll tell you funny story. When I decided to hang up my gloves, if you will, and stop making institutional venture capital investments, I had a whole bunch of ideas about what I wanted to do next. And what I was, oh, I'll do a bunch of angel investing. You know, Bezos did it on the side. You know, this would be fantastic. He did pretty well with the angel investing. I was explaining this to a, I won't say who it is, but it's still can be out of the CEO very successful. And he said, what are you going to do now? I said, how's the going to do an angel investing? He goes, why would you do that? He said, I got 50 of these things. Like people don't return my calls because I wish I'd never done it. So there's a unglamorous side to it as much as there is a glamorous side and you've participated in it. What would I say? I think if I were doing angel investments, I'd try and find an intersection of people that are super curious and are playing with all these AI tools, but bring a perspective from a particular industry that gives them an advantage in that area where they could simultaneously be maybe the smartest user of AI in their genre. So despite the, or maybe because of, because we talked about the pair, the AI bubble, you would still be looking at AI intersected opportunities if you were angel investing. Yeah. There's a weird reality out there right now. And if this could end if ever a bubble is popped or whatever, but the institutional investors have zero interest in non-AI deals, zero. It's more black and white than I could be successful and for people who do not know the term define the institutional investor. People who are paid both a salary and a piece of the return to be active investors of other people's money using other people's money. But the reason that kind of matters is if you angel fund a deal and have any hope of it raising money in the future, if it's not AI related right now, there is no interest. I can't state clearly enough how there's zero interest. And I could simultaneously make fun of that reality, but I could also justify that reality, but it is the reality right now. And by the way, while I mention that, I feel obligated for your audience, like, I don't care what field you're in, you should be playing with this stuff. It has the potential to impact your role in your career. And the best way to protect against any risk of your career being off-uscated or eliminated from AI is to be the most AI-enabled version of yourself you can possibly be.

Just a quick thanks to our sponsors and we'll be right back to the show. So our place reached out to me as a potential sponsor. And the first thing I did was look at the reviews of their products and said, send me one. And that is the titanium always pan pro. And the claim is that it's the first non-stick pan with zero coding. So that means zero forever chemicals and durability that'll last forever. I was very skeptical. I was very busy. So I said, you know what? I want to test this thing quickly. I'm going to test it with two things. I'm going to test it with scrambled eggs in the morning. And then I'm going to test it with a steakser. And it worked perfectly in both cases. And the design is really clever. It does combine the best qualities of stainless steel, cast iron, and non-stick into one product. And now our place is expanding this first of its kind technology to their titanium pro cookware sets, which are made in limited quantities. So if you're looking for non-toxic, long lasting pots and pans that outperform everything else in your kitchen, just head to our place dot com. Save an extra 10% off holiday sale prices on titanium cookware from our place with code save 10 Tim head to from our place dot com to see why more than a million people have made the switch to our place kitchenware. And with their 100 day risk free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can shop with total confidence. Check it out from our place dot com. Not to be a salty old dog, but in the early 2000s back in the day when I was running my own e-commerce business, the tools were atrocious. They tried hard when man was at bad did to cobble all sorts of stuff together. I could only dream of a platform like Shopify. Shopify is the commerce platform behind millions of businesses around the world. And now 10% of all e-commerce in the US is on Shopify. Now back to the early 2000s, then nobody even thought of AI who could have predicted even in the last 24 months, the magic that is now possible with AI Shopify has been ahead of the curve and they are packed with helpful AI tools that will accelerate everything right product descriptions page headlines even enhance your product photography best of all Shopify expertly handles everything for managing inventory to international shipping to processing returns and beyond if you're ready to sell you're ready for Shopify. Sign up for your $1 per month trial and start selling today at shopify.com slash Tim. One more time that's shopify.com slash Tim in 2026 stop waiting and start selling with Shopify.

How would you think about maybe you can give a hypothetical example of looking for someone who has very, very sophisticated domain expertise and experience who's now intersecting with AI and has a unique because of the combination perspective on things to invest in as an angel investor. Separate that from something that's just going to be consumed by the fundamental models and these larger companies that from a career perspective or from an angel investment perspective. How would you pick folks you don't think are just going to end up working on something that gets replicated in short order by the bigger companies. The key is just to stay pretty far away from the edge of whatever you can go online and see interviews with the people in Anthropica Open AI and what they're working on. Like if it's the next thing they're going to do I don't think you're going to be protected. But as I think about founders and angel investors you're talking about a pretty broad array of things. At this point as I mentioned earlier you're not going to back the next big model company. Besides if you were you need a billion dollar angel investment to go make that happen the games change there's so much money involved. I think you're going to want to be off the beaten path anyway. When I think about these deeper verticals I don't think it will make sense for Open AI to go crush every little vertical waste management. Even if the model's capable of understanding that subject matter there are workflows there are data sets that are local to your customer and that has stuff has to be stitched together. So I think having an understanding of a particular industry and one that's not going to be on the next thing to do list at Open AI would probably be your best bet. Got it. So is it fair to say if I'm understanding you correctly that effectively looking for something that would not be a high priority for one of these larger companies and also proprietary data set of some time. Repriodyry data sets the more kind of workflows that exist are better because you can build software around those things. What does it work, Flow? The thing to pop them in my head I'm on the board of Zillow. Zillow's been investing for the past five years in tools that help the realtor do their day to day job. They have a tool called Showing Time that helps you book in person tours at houses as an example. Like there's putting the mortgage together getting the sign off. So like there's just all these tasks that have to be happened that can be automated. And so tasks that can be automated that can be integrated with AI. The more of that stuff you can build into a system the better off you're going to be protecting yourself from a model that just answers questions, which is why I brought it up. Let's move on to big topic, big country, China. You spent 10 days there over the past summer. What was your experience? What did you see? What made an impression? What did you do? I'd been about six times before. So this is like my seventh trip. There was one thing that was different. My daughter is Asian Studies major as you were. And she spent the summer in Hong Kong. So we picked her up and then we toured six cities in 10 days. And my objective with this trip in the past trips it was mostly just to meet with entrepreneurs and founders and mutual sharing of information, that kind of thing. This time I was more interested in just kind of being eyes wide open and learning. And so we took two of the high speed trains, you know, just as an experience that I got a tour of the Xiaomi factory with their new car, the SU7. And was trying to get a feel for what kind of most recent there. And we went to Shenzhen, the overnight city, which is going from I think less than 100,000 people in 1982, 20 million people. Just to see the scale and scope of the whole thing. There's a lot of rhetoric in the US about what is or isn't happening in China. And I just wanted to have a better feel for it. And we're making policy decisions that are going to impact the global footprint and God forbid, you know, end up in a World War III kind of situation. So anyway, I just wanted a better understanding. I was aided by the fact that Dan Wong shared his book Breakneck with me right before I left. And I read it while I was there, which was interesting. And then it came out. And of course, it ended up on the best seller list. But I think it's miss perceived, I think China's misperceived in a lot of ways. What are some of those misperceptions? The biggest one is that people who have a rudimentary understanding of what is happening there, use this word communism to infer a lot of other things. And one of the things that's inferred by communism is top down state run system. I think they think of Russia. And they assume, well, that'll always lead to bad capital allocation, no innovation. Because they have this picture of in their mind of, I don't know, like brick buildings with snow all around them. And not much happening. And the reality there's just far, far different from that. I think Dan Wong did a great job of explaining how the country puts out this five-year plan within the provinces, which are they're a lot bigger than a US state, but they're the equivalent, like the Tau, the country segment, and they compete with each other. And the effective mayor of the province, if he does well, has a chance to move up in the system, which is not the reality in the US system. But what that leads to is just a massive amount of competition. What are the metrics by which they're being judged? Do you have any idea on a province level? Is it some equivalent of GDP? It's not the right term, but I'm guessing probably. Yeah, we could go talk to AI and get a better answer than I have right now. But yeah, I would think that's part of it, prosperity, employment, those kind of things. By the way, this provincial competition is also led to overbuild buildings. It's not always positive. Bridges that aren't used, there's a ghost city. Ghost cities. Yes, but you end up with hyper competition. So I think the thing that a lot of people in Silicon Valley love about capitalism is this notion of the invisible hand and competition that leads to innovation and best practice. And the winners rise up and they're better for it. That is happening there. And if you read about the solar industry or the EV industry or now the robotics industry, they have hundreds of different companies competing in these fields. And it's brutal competition. And as a result of that, they're ending up with very innovative companies, which once again, I think people wouldn't prescribe to being possible in a communist world and remarkable execution from a industrial standpoint. So the price points of the products that will be sold around the globe are well below anything that could be done. How do you go about getting a tour of Xiaomi Factory out? Think that they would be very closed about that. I don't know if you saw this going around the internet yesterday, but they shipped a car to this YouTuber. Oh, yeah, I saw it. Which is brilliant. And that's the SG7. That's the factory I went to. As I mentioned, I'd been there before. So I met Lesjun, who's the founder of Xiaomi in 2005 when he was chairman of Jouyo, which was a e-commerce company that Amazon bought. So he's been around a while. He has evolved into the best thing I could say is like he's the Steve Jobs of China right now. When he quit doing Jouyo and he had this other company as well, he declared 10 years ago he's going to build a smartphone. Just out of the blue, I'm going to build a smartphone. He didn't have any smartphone experience, but Xiaomi is now the third largest manufacturer of handsets in the globe. And about four or five years ago, at about the exact same time, Apple, and a day we're interested in building a car, he said, I'm going to build a car. Well, not only do you say I'm going to build a car, but that was a response to sanctions, right? It was an emergency. I listened to one of what I listened to the translation of, even though my Chinese is decent, but it's not as good as it once was his, I think it was 2024. That's it. Company-wide address where he talked about sanctions coming in saying, what if we couldn't make phones? What would we do? But that talk is unbelievable in it. It's translated on YouTube and I would encourage people to watch from about minute 30 to about a minute 15, or an hour 15, which is where he talks about his process for designing the car. I don't know if you saw that part. But it's crazy. He says he put a note on any car in his parking lot that he had never drove, and he would ask each employee to give him three positives, three negatives, and loan him the car. He drove 200 of his employees' cars. When you hear that kind of stuff, you're like, wow, I wonder if anyone at Apple did that. It's just such a bottomed up, just ground truth, the way to start the process. But even still, even if you did that, a bunch of people could do that. How do you have the wherewithal to build a factory? He'd never built the factory before. I've been in other car factories here in the US. It was phenomenal. Anyway, back to your question. Yes, I'll get in. Yeah, I knew they'd June from from way back. What does the process look like? Are there a bunch of clearances and you have to get the okay from the provincial? I don't think we went through the whole factory, but no, it wasn't that. I mean, they're a public company. I think they're interested in being well understood, which I think hints at why they enabled this. I think they had to send a car to this guy, the YouTuber. Yeah. And by the way, the president of Ford went over there about six months before I did, went on the same tour so they let him go there. And he had an SU-7 ship to Michigan and he drove it for several weeks and he's talked about how incredible it is. Well, he also, if I'm remembering correctly, has talked about EV production and battery dominance, or at least component dominance from China and the sort of risks inherent in that. I don't want to bleed too far into geopolitics, but it's hard not to pull it into the conversation. So this is a question from X, the artist formerly known as one of many questions, but what are your top handful of critiques, say, of the Chinese tech ecosystem or CCP after going on a tour there? What would you say they're not doing well or things that complicate their ability to compete? Well, the first one that I think been well-publicized is when an entrepreneur has risen to a level of success and then uses that as a platform, the government seems uninterested in that. So, the Jack Ma. Yeah, exactly. And there's a saying that I think I heard while I was over there, don't be the tallest tree. Yeah, this is, don't be the tallest tree. The nail that sticks out gets hammered down in Japan. They have a totally different system, obviously. The other entrepreneur outside of Lesion is the Biden CEO. And Biden's is probably got the leading position for the consumer AI, like OpenAI, but over there right now, in addition to just incredible revenue growth, this is the company that don't take talk and whatnot. But they're not going public and you don't see him at all, which may get to this tallest tree thing. Yeah, I mean, Slebri's also disappear over there. No, very mysteriously. Yes. Well, and business people. Yeah. So, yes, that does happen. I will say, and for people who are wondering, because there are a lot of, I should we put this, I mean, there are people who are very angry, very hawkish. Some people are very, very supportive. And then their agendas or alliances get questioned. I like you. I'm just interested in understanding what is happening to the extent that I can. What is the actual truth on the ground? What are the details? And frankly, I mean, the innovation over there is remarkable. And what they've done in terms of establishing access to rare metals and everything they need to make factories, you go to South America or Africa, and it is Chinese everywhere on infrastructure projects. I mean, they've been very, very smart about it. So I'm deeply interested in all of it. And please hold your thought because I want to hear everything you have to say. What I would say is a piece of the three-dimensional chest that I've been impressed with is how well the Chinese government is able to, well, I mean, of course, are able to integrate with the private sector so that they're able to use, in a sense, products to widen their scope of access, potentially like DJI, for instance. Great example. People have a lot of questions around these cars as spectacular as they might be. Are they an extension of surveillance? These are open questions that I think are worth asking. Let me make one point and then let's come to that. So there's two other things I wanted to mention. Obviously, infrastructure. So they are building new nuclear-fission plants. So fission being old school, not new school, at one fourth the price that we do it here in the US. So a South Korea about it. Yeah, the numbers are incredible. But when we sit here and say, oh, we want to reshore manufacturing and they can build things at one fourth the price we can. If you don't solve that, you're going to reshore something and we're going to not be price competitive globally because you won't input what they have and you're going to make our citizens buy from this new factory where we're making things way more expensive. It doesn't work. The math doesn't math. And by the way, I know it's not sure it brings jobs. The Xiaomi factory was a third based on some numbers I was able to acquire. A third, the number of employees per car output. And I got to believe in 10 years it'll be a sixth. And so you could calculate the total number of jobs. You'd be bringing back if you brought back all this car production and it be hundreds of thousands. It's not millions and millions of jobs. So anyway, that infrastructure things for real. And I think Dan Wong does a good job of saying that America is run by a lawyer. This is the author of a breakneck. Our country is run by lawyers and theirs is run by engineers. And so when you try and build something here, you know, the lawyers just get in the way and try and block it. Which certainly when you hear Elon talks about why the gigafactories here in Austin and not in California all relates to those things. So anyway, that's infrastructure. There's another thing that I think quite interesting, which is the government may not care about whether or not their companies have really big market caps. And when I first realized this, you know, you saw what happened when they took down Ali Baba when they went after Jack Maun and financial could have been this big thing and it got, you know, haircut. And you question, well, do they care? And if you are pushing your companies to be low-cost providers, maybe that's at odds with them being hyper-profitable and really big. And then you can turn around and ask the question. Hearing that caused me to ask the question, does America really benefit by the fact that the Mag 7 have $3 trillion market caps? I know the employees of those companies do. But is that a sign of our competitive capitalistic society not being truly competitive on a global scale? And no, even within like there's a notion you learn about in economics classes called pure competition and in pure competition, no one has an intellectual property advantage. Marginal profits are whittled down just to the cost of capital and the consumer benefits because there's no excessive profit capture. If we have all these companies that are able to kind of have excessive profits, is that a form of market failure? And does the fact that they exist help America in any way? At first, I, of course, I'm a venture capitalist. I want to think, yes, of course, but then as I think about it, I don't know that our government or our society or our people are better off because these six companies have $3 trillion market caps. It's not that many people that like the percentage of the country that's employed by those companies is small on overall basis. I think they have a different perspective on whether big market caps matter and I think that is somewhat intriguing. What do you think about the innovation in China leading in some cases to the development of superior technology at a lower cost that is plausibly an extension of the intelligence gathering apparatus of the government? Is that a real thing? I'm not in a good place to know. I would have to mention it seems like they would have to be stupid not to use that given the their ability to penetrate private sector. I think it's, yeah, I think it's certainly well known that they do surveillance of their own people and I know that would be, you know, particularly upsetting to people like Greg Lukionov that runs fire and is very interesting free speech. The flip side is there's very little street crime. You walk around, you don't worry about that when you're there. It's true also in Japan though. Doesn't it doesn't make it right or wrong? It's just, it is what it is and I don't know that we have this ability to kind of tell them how they have to do it. Now to the extent that the Huawei stuff where their products are being shipped out and then those are used to gather intelligence out of their country and the rest of the world, of course, that's a problem. But I think the way to deal with it, I'm not a politician but I think the way to deal with it. I'm more of a believer of the engage, you know, like engage, talk about what you don't like and what to do like and try and negotiate that problem away. Like we're trying to do with the fentanyl precursor. Yeah, well, the way back in the day when I was in the East Asian Studies major, this was lifetimes ago and keeping in mind, like I was at the capital University of Business Economics in 1996. That was the bicycle era. These old photographs of Beijing with millions of bicycles with people in their long green jackets. I had one of those jackets for the winters. It gets really cold. But things have changed a lot. At the time, I was looking forward and thinking I might be one of those people who could engage in Chinese. I think the way to do it is an English frankly for a whole host of reasons. But even if you speak the other language, like Putin speaks English pretty well, but he does all of this negotiations when he's speaking in Russian for a lot of good reasons. Yeah, I do get accused of being like an agent of a CCP or something, even by some of the people that responded to your Twitter. I'm not. I've only visited a few times. I don't know anybody in the in the government. But I worry greatly that we make bad policy decisions if we misunderstand what's really going on. I agree with that. I fully agree with that. I mean, I've thought about, frankly, I'm worried about it. I mean, I would take a burner phone and a burner lamp. I've thought about because I want to get a better understanding of the culture of innovation that can be fostered and exactly how things are to the extent that it would be visible to me. How things are developing in China. I've thought about going there. I've thought about doing the same thing in India too to go and interview like 10 of the top entrepreneurs. But the reason I haven't done it is that I'm just like, I don't know what radar is that's going to put me on. What kind of surveillance, what kind of film the blank, how difficult is it going to be? Who's rings am I going to have to kiss? Am I overthinking it or is it? I think you're overthinking it. I think the odds that Tim Ferris would disappear in China is really. Oh, I'm not worried about this. That would be a terrible. That like upside down side on that doesn't make any sense. I'm not worried about disappearing. There are companies that may not speak with you like when I was there deep sea con unitary. The word was kind of out on the street that they're not meeting with Western. Yeah. You know, for reasons that are well, it's a sign I'm sure that's true. Conversely in the US too. Yes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure that's true. And by the way, I think that reflective, you know, lens when you think about the country is helpful. Like Alex Carp was just on stage a deal book. Last week he was talking about surveillance and he says, well, of course, our tools are used to surveil the enemy. Yeah. And I'm like, okay, well, my God, the Chinese are surveilling us. But obviously we're surveilling them too. Yeah. Yeah. But let's be honest about these things. Yeah. I mean, it's a lot easier for a bunch of obvious reasons. It's in some respects a lot easier for them to surveil us than the other way around. I mean, partially just due to the homogeneity of the society over there, right? You can't like send a bunch of blonde hair blue eyes, black Latina, whatever to China to end up at like top universities, top companies, etc. It's just a lot of. But we put a bit of bow on this part. Like I would say there's two other things. One, you think it at one, the supply chains are so integrated in China down to the raw material level that even if you brought the factory back here, it'd be more of an assembly shop and you'd still be sourcing there, which isn't necessarily cost competitive. And to replicate all of it would take a very, very, very long time. While including raw materials for staple pharmaceuticals, I mean, there's a lot. So there's a lot going on. So what at this point is that a day late and a dollar short for the US, I know I almost promised we weren't going to go into this. But I want to know your opinion. I'm so curious. Like what are the keys to the US remaining globally competitive and vibrant as an economy? You hinted to one, which is it seems kind of inevitable, nuclear power or more power. So how do you do that? I'm not sure how quickly you can write the ship, although it seems like a handful of people have done a pretty good job changing the narrative. What are some of the key things in European and that the US needs to do? One is make it easier to build. Build companies? I think build infrastructure. Like if you're going to build semiconductor plants, if you're going to build nuclear plants on time and on budget, that's very hard to do in the US right now. And the glimmer of hope, I would say, is that a few states seem to have governors that want to get stuff out of the way. And I think it's red tape and bureaucracy and lawyers and litigation that make this stuff so expensive. And so Texas and Arizona seem to be getting their unfair share of data centers and semiconductor plants. And I think because of that attitude, I've seen a similar attitude in Pennsylvania, and you know, where they're like they repaired I-95 and 12 days because they literally had to take a bunch of statutes that are on the books and say they don't apply right now. So that mindset, I think needs a lot more momentum. That'd be one thing. There's another thing that I think's important for people to understand on the China front. There are numerous people with a loud microphone that will say, oh, they know how to scale out like plants, but they don't know how to do any innovation. And that's just flat wrong. Whoever's saying that just hasn't been there. They don't know the facts on the ground. These entrepreneurs are every bit as good as the entrepreneurs they are here. There are examples like in LIDAR, they built the MEMS LIDAR product. It's like $130 a car. What is MEMS LIDAR? It's solid-stated. It uses solid-stated semiconductor technology instead of that big spinning radar. And so the LIDAR on a WayMose 5 grand. And it's $130 for MEMS LIDAR that's putting on every car. You can go into chat, you can see. Tell me about MEMS LIDAR innovation in China. But it's just a great example. Laysune is another one. But like anybody that thinks there's no innovation is just they're just wrong. They got blinders. Yeah, no, that's not true. That's definitely not true. I asked you two years ago, if there are any countries that you're long on, at the time, I'd be curious if this is still the case. You said you're long on the UK. Less regulatory capture. Losing party pay is in the legal system. I do love that. Which reduces frivolous litigation compared to the US. Any thoughts on where you're bullish these days? Ironically, Matt Ridley was in town a few weeks ago. The rational optimists. Yes, I love his stuff. But he would say that I would be dead wrong on that. It thinks things aren't going well there. And he lives there. So I'll just take that as I did. I got that one wrong. Well, I mean, it depends on the time for him too. I mean, this is two years or is it five years or is it ten years? One of the things that's been impressed about China is since Deng Xiaoping brought back capitalism, 500 million people have come out of poverty. You look at countries that have a very strong work ethic and a high education and a low currently low per-populate income. And you would think more jobs would come their way. So two that would pop for me are Vietnam and Turkey. Who kind of check all those boxes? All right. Hopefully I do better than the check-in in another two years.

Just a quick thanks to our sponsors and we'll be right back to the show. Cretian isn't just for muscle. It's essential daily fuel for your brain, your body, and long-term performance. For me, I have Alzheimer's and dementia risk in my family. The cognitive benefits are the reason I take Cretian every single day. And today's episode sponsor, Mementus is the gold standard in Cretian. There's a lot of BS flooding around, but I choose them why because they source Criapure Cretian, the purest, most effective Cretian monohydrate available. So if you've been curious about Cretian, this is your moment to get back on track or try it for the first time. Mementus is also now introducing the Mementus Cretian Choose. Each chew delivers one gram of pure Criapure Cretian monohydrate. I was skeptical of these shoes and I was like, I'm never going to use these. I turns out that I use them all the time. They're super convenient and they are NSF certified for sports. So you get the gold standard purity without all the mess. Head to liveMementus.com and use code Tim for up to 35% off of your first order. Hey folks, Tim here. My best selling card game, Coyote, which I made with the amazing team at Exploding Kittens, just one the pop insider best geeky game of 2025 and also best stocking filler in the Made for Mums toy awards 2025. It is on sale everywhere. It's cheap. It's fast to learn. It has 4.8 stars out of five. People are loving it. Coyotegame.com will take you to all the retailers, but you can find it everywhere. It is a game of thinking fast and laughing faster. Think charades, meets hot potato, meets a bunch of brain fun. It's good for your head. It's perfect for families with kids, age 10 plus, or adults for a kids at heart or don't take themselves too seriously. A lot of adults love this game. And as I said, it's available everywhere. Amazon, Walmart, Target, 8000 plus retail locations. You name it. So please check it out. I loved making it. People are really enjoying it and has 300 or 400 million plus social views of gameplay online. And try and enjoy it this holiday season. Check it out, coyotegame.com. One more time. That's coyotegame.com or anywhere you buy your games. Now back to the episode.

All right, let's talk about this is going to be a segue to talking about running down a dream and all things involved with that. Maybe we could start with an anecdote from a fellow Austin night. I'd like to play the bar goes long hair associated with smoking, wreak for every once in a while. Matthew, we were talking about a short anecdote about Matthew before we started recording. Would you mind sharing that? Is I was preparing? Because I was kind of wrapping up the book. I started listening to green lights. And I was told you had to listen to it because of course he reads it. So you get all this great, what kind of hay affections as you read it. But there's a story in it that just popped in my brain and kind of summarized exactly what I'm trying to accomplish with this book running down a dream. And he had spent the vast majority of his younger adult life. So this is anecdotes from when he was like 20, 21, telling his family he was going to be a lawyer. And so he got into the University of Texas. He was pre law. You know every time he went home we talked about yeah, we're going to be a lawyer. And he had met some people at Texas that had convinced him that he should switch to film school. And he had immense anxiety about sharing this with his father's father. This is on the book, but his father's a very tough individual. And so reason to be fearful. You know when you're going to drop some news no longer going to be a lawyer. I'm going to go to film school. And he builds it up a lot in the book like I didn't know when I was going to talk to him like you can imagine being in that situation you're delaying delaying delaying. But he finally tells his dad and his dad others the this very simple phrase well don't have acid. And he says you know of all the reactions he could have had don't have acid were the last words I expected to hear. And the best words he could have ever said to me. And he said in that single moment he gave him blessing consent approval validation privilege honor freedom and responsibility called it rocket fuel. And I'd like to believe there are a number of people out there young adults maybe even some midlife career who have this notion that they should be doing something else. But society has put them on a path or just the way they matriculated through college put them into a career that they just don't love. And that they have this inkling that they could go do this thing or maybe you're a young kid and you really want to do X but everybody else is telling you to do a B and C like I want to help them have the confidence in permission to go do X like to go chase this dream. And as you ended up from our last call I think your ability to make connections and to gather information and learn on your own pace has never been better. You can literally just sit there and talk to chat GPT six hours a day if you so choose and learn so much about any particular field. And so your ability to take things into your own hands and to go try and be successful and this thing that you feel passionate about I think has never been better. Why do you think when you initially gave and subsequently had to go online run down a dream as a presentation why do you think that took why did it strike a chord in the way that it did what do you think it was? I think we built a society like nobody's fault like we just built a society where we love to celebrate people that are successful in a lot of different fields but when it comes to our own children we tend to think way more pragmatically about what they should be doing. Lawyers, consultants, doctors, computer scientists like it's all these jobs that have certainty to the financial component. And I think that's so well intended like I don't think there's malintent of anyone in the system and I'm a parent of three like I've been through this you just feel this obligation to try and push them towards prosperity but it's not intellectual prosperity it's not happiness it's financial you know it's like ability yes. Most people are guiding children towards and this isn't that complicated math but most people end up working 80,000 hours in their life it's the third of your life you know why do something you don't like there's Gallup poll data on career engagement and 59% of people say they're not engaged at work and this is that whole quiet quitting thing that we hear so much about and some of these numbers are in an all-time low and it just seems horrific like the people are kind of sontering through life what are some of the keys to taking the path less traveled than in this case and I mean there's few I highlighted for myself but where should we start I highlighted one for myself we don't have to start here but go where the action is I just think this is so underrated and people it further undervalue it maybe in a digital world but we can start anywhere you want that's just one that's that really jumped out to me because I think it's really underrated but where would you like to start? In the book one of the things that we tied together very early on is the interplay between passion or fascination or curiosity and learning and the way to be most successful in any endeavor but certainly if you're going to go tilted something that's less pragmatic is to be the smartest most knowledgeable person you can possibly be and knowledge is free now as we've talked about and I have this test for whether or not you're actually truly passionate about what you're trying to do which is do you self-learn on your own time like would you not watch Breaking Bad and read about this field and be energized by that activity if you if you are and you know we have 20 30 different stories in the book of people that have been successful almost all of them check that box you just have this amazing ability to gain knowledge so much faster than everyone else you would be competing with you know and that's going to be useful that's unquestionably going to be useful it makes me think of an interview I saw a long time ago actually it was quite a few years ago but it was an interview with Joe Rogan and he said something that surprised me might surprise a lot of people which was along the lines of he's not good at it was either will power or discipline which is he's in great shape obviously black belt jujitsu he's done what he's done with the podcast he's the undisputed king of podcasting etc etc etc and he said I'm not actually good at whether it was discipline or will power but I am good at obsession it's all on or all off and I've seen that I'm sure you've seen this in a lot of the entrepreneurs who actually make it to the other side and create these mega successes they are just obsessed and that gives them a huge not just knowledge advantage but endurance advantage you just go down the checkboxes it's all advantages I had the opportunity to talk to Angela duckworth when I was working on this and her book grit talks about two components passion and perseverance and I heard a podcast she had done recently where she said if she could go back she would put far more weight on the passion and the perseverance because she says we've taught our children to grind and so once again starting in sixth grade they told to you know learn the flute and take the cross and do all this stuff and you know crush the SATs and take the extra credit classes and all this and they all do it and they all do it and then they go to college and or how are you doing they take six hours of class instead of four and they're just going but eventually she says if you don't have that passion you just burn out and so you're right about the energy part I think it's both knowledge and you put in more cycles yeah it makes me think of maybe this is cliched in Silicon Valley because it gets so oft repeated but a lot of folks listening will not have heard it which is if you're looking for the next sort of technological breakthrough or something on the edge look for what the nerds are doing on the weekends but it's not just a great way to find what might be coming around the corner in a few years it's a great way to find the people to bet on who are already using their excess their free time to work on these things no I think a repet is in 3d printing I mean I can just go down the list and by the way that's another advantage of going to the epicenter is there's more people doing that all the time let's talk about people might be surprised by this but Bob Dylan I think this is just the quintessential example why is he relevant to what we're talking about when this idea popped in my head I had finished a third biography and contrasted it with these other two and I just saw all these patterns you know VCs a game of pattern recognition I guess my brain's just developed I was like oh my god it's all this kind of lock thing where these three people had all done the same thing and one was basketball coach one was a restaurant tour and the other was Bob Dylan not industry hell this is where you should get career development advice right there's a part of the Dylan story that most people wouldn't know unless they had read all the biography these are maybe seeing the Scorsese documentary but the new movie misses the whole thing which is the pre-New York Bob Dylan was hanging out in Minnesota studying folk music at such a deep level that I feel confident in saying when he left he knew more about folk music than any other human in Minnesota and he was borrowing maybe that's even a euphemism he was stealing his friends albums he was going into the record store into these listening booths like he knew all there was to know and had studied every bit of it and he's referred to by Scorsese as a music expeditionary and the people that knew him in New York City could mimic any one song it's not what you would think of when you hear a Dylan song that he'd kind of mastered the bedrock underneath and then started innovating but Picasso by the way the same thing perfect realist painter at age 14 if you go to the Barcelona Picasso museum like it's in geographic order and you're kind of shocked at how good a realist this kid was before he went and did this other thing that bedrock knowledge I think is so differentiating for someone to have all the history and then to start doing the innovation what was the before and after on Dylan sort of Minnesota New York City and why is that such an important thing and just to like even pile on more on this kind of studious part of Bob Dylan he did a podcast series for a while where he just walks through all these different genres of music and you're talking about Bob Dylan himself? Yes, I do realize this. Yes, yes you can go find it and then that book he put out of the 50 best songs that coffee table book that came out two years ago it's incredible the amount of knowledge he has about songs outside of his genre everything so he's just clear student of what he's doing I think this is well known and is covered at the beginning of the movie he went to New York to find Woody Guthrie probably the single kind of most deterministic and ambitious mentor pursuit story that I've ever heard of like he hitchhiked there with no money and found him and became friends with him. This echo is back to go where the action is also. Oh no doubt. And by the way he landed in Manhattan at the center of the folk music scene and all those people he was studying when he was listening in Minnesota they were all there you know he got to know him if that doesn't happen I don't think Dylan happened you know how relevant do you think the go where the action is now considering the access to information using chat GPT or other tools etc etc etc maybe less so access to mentors although you can have virtual relationships but how relevant do you think that is I've got my own opinion you could certainly have the type of peer and mentor experiences that are remote I have a great anecdote about Mr. Beast in the book that we can talk about there was a remote one but the benefits of being in and around a whole bunch of people that are chasing the same thing is so high and I think the intuition is oh it's going to be even more competitive so why would I wouldn't it be better to try and do this in a town where it's less of a big deal but the problem is your learning is impacted your access to peers and mentors is drastically reduced and then probably most importantly your optionality gets cut so dramatically people think that a lot of success stories they attribute it to luck but you know is that famous saying luck is when preparation meets opportunity and when you're in the epicenter both to your preparation and your opportunity to go up you know 10 acts and so your ability to just have that lucky moment where you get brought into something is so much higher so the lucky moment is I think really important to underscore in terms of going where the action is because there's a lot you can do virtually but let's just say you're using chat GPT you're going to get what you prompt in other words like you're asking for something yeah and that can take you down a rabbit hole but they're at least in my lived experience and certainly I still see this happening when I move to Silicon Valley in 2000 and then I look back at my angel investing career I look back at all these collaborations the vast majority of them did not come from me going out with an agenda and seeking something they came from serendipitous bumping into somebody at a coffee shop I literally met in the Valrava complex I was hitting on his girlfriend at the time when she was getting her coffee didn't realize they were together and then you look at Garrett camp Kevin Rose these are like at a barbecue I met Kevin Rose and you go down the list and you look at all of these formative massively impactful personally and professionally relationships they almost all came from serendipity and you just don't seem to get that density unless you're in the center of the action and perhaps it's easier to relocate yourself I'm sure it is when you have fewer responsibilities but I can't even imagine what my life would look like had I not you know left Long Island and then ultimately moved Silicon Valley same for me I had thought about the notion of venture capital and practicing it and probably would have jumped at any job I could have got like when I was at McCombs here in Austin I tried to get an interview at Austin Ventures like I didn't get one but had they said yes maybe I practiced there and I'm glad that didn't happen like going and practicing it where I did was the exact right place to do it I do think of if you can because of their our financial constraints you know if you want to be graded a field and that field has an epicenter I think you should go and there are different types of energy epicenter too like you think about let's just say AI not to repeatedly bang that drum but you could just say okay AI first thing that comes to mind Silicon Valley but it's gonna be a bit of a digression but I remember asking Derek Sivers friend of mine amazing entrepreneur kind of philosopher programmer people can look him up but I asked him who's the first person who comes to mind when you think of the word successful he said well actually the most interesting or more interesting question might be who's the third person who comes to mind because I might say something really obvious like Richard Branson but is he successful I don't really know what his goals were so I'd have to compare his goals to his outcomes and then you get to the third similarly with an epicenter you could say Silicon Valley first but there might be something that is a dense in learning but has other advantages like I think it's the University of Waterloo but one of these universities where industry is trying to raid the academic program because it's so strong in terms of teaching the technical side right so there's so many different ways to approach it but let's talk about a virtual example you mentioned Mr. Beast could you describe that story yeah I actually heard it on a podcast but I had it I also got a chance to talk to Jimmy Donaldson so we got it firsthand when he was infatuated with YouTube he was one of the first people that was infatuated with YouTube his parents were rightfully trying to get him to go to school in college which he wasn't doing because he was playing around on on YouTube all day he met three other people who were equally fascinated with YouTube and this is a virtual epicenter story but it's really a pier story one of my six principals is embrace your peers and I think far too many people have sharp elbows to peers because they think you know they're climbing the ladder and they've got to beat these people and the world's just way too prosperous to have that mindset you can learn so much and get so much value from co-climbing that you should definitely do that and I think it's not taught enough and people don't do it enough but Jimmy happened on these three people and they got on a Skype call he said 20 hours a day and for years sounds like Jimmy for years they shared best practices on this call which apparently in that world like the color of the icon on the post you do on Instagram to send them to you to all these little bitty assé“é“ž there things can impact conversion and he said when he was talking about this that they all became millionaires he said if you or any random individual had been a fifth person on those calls you would have to because of that and it's just a wonderful example of how peers you know he on this podcast said something that was very clever he took the 10,000 hours thing from Gladwell and said well there were four of us spending 10,000 hours and then sharing ideas so you get 40,000 hours of expertise how would you suggest people who are not on YouTube where you can identify outliers perhaps I shouldn't say easily in this day and age I mean it's it's a sea of participants but how should people go about seeking peers and do you rank order your principles in a way for instance do you want to first check the box if you can of go where the action is and then embrace your peers because the level will be higher I think about for instance my experience in Silicon Valley it could have just as easily for something else been Nashville or New York City or who knows Shanghai I mean it just depends on what you're doing the mentors let's just say like Mike Maples Jr who taught me the the very basic ropes of angel investing he definitely without him like I don't go zero to one in terms of having any basic literacy or access so that was like the first wrong on the ladder but then once I was in you look at people who were in a sense just getting started at the time I mean holy shit some of them have really exploded I mean they've all done really well Kevin Rose and of all yeah Chris Saka the remaining that the ladder goes on forever but like 49 rungs after that initial step up zero to one or it was all peer-driven and those guys we were we were comparing notes the whole way see that's the thing like I would say first of all I would practice it wherever you are I'd practice it virtually I'd practice it locally and if you can move to the F center I'd practice it there I don't know that it's an either or thing you can have multiple groups of peers you can have multiple circles of peers but I think there's only two tests and one is trust there are people in this world who view everything as a zero sum game and they will elbow you out the first chance they can get and so those shouldn't be your peers those people you should quickly push to the side so trust and then this shared interest in learning and if they are equally learning on their own dime in their free time which is my test for whether you actually truly are passionate about something if they're doing that also that's perfect and those experiences you've talked about I've had so many of myself they get excited to tell you what they just learned right yeah and then you reciprocate right and by the way Mike's a great example might I have a both a passion and a lot of respect for people that are writers in their industry and Buffett did it and Howard Marx did it who I benefited greatly from I tried my entire career to write quite a bit but Mike does this he's a huge share when it comes to his knowledge about the subject matter yeah I don't agree excellent book also so great yeah Mike I'm hoping to see him again soon it's been a minute we've talked about Mr. Beast Bob Dylan in both cases kind of like poor kids with nothing to lose right in a sense not in any destitute sense but they're starting at like futons and ramen right it was just interview to deal book also and his mother was in the front row who apparently works for him now so he was telling the story about when he went to tell her he was dropping out of college you know similar to the McConaughey's story Jimmy's being more abrupt but you know of course she's happy now yeah don't work out I mean there's always a little survivor who's biased but no doubt let's talk about Danny Meyer because I want to give an example of someone who gave something up yeah to then pursue X instead of A B or C so could you say a little bit about Danny you know I've interviewed him on the podcast I might have been him through you I don't even remember how I initially connected with him but who is Danny Meyer and what is this kind of Genesis story of Danny Meyer at the restaurant I was 20 when someone asked me who is Danny Meyer I feel compelled the first thing to say he's one of the most genuine humans on the planet yeah for sure for sure but he is also one of the most celebrated restaurant tours of our time he was working for a company that sold these devices to clip on the clothes so you can't steal them from a retail store yeah and he was making good money he was making about 200 thousand dollars a year and this is at the time 40 years ago so real money real real money and he had convinced himself he was going to be a lawyer I guess a lot of people convinced themselves of that and he was about to take the outset and he was out to dinner with his uncle and you know his uncle was probing him and probing him oh yeah he's going to take the outset and he's I think his uncle sensed a lack of real conviction about this thing this person this human was going to do and he literally said to him why are you doing this you know you want to be a restaurant tour and when you read Danny's book he did spend a ton of time in his youth being fascinated with restaurants to the point where he would take copious notes like prior to even doing this so his family had a reason to know that he had this deep passion but it's entering it's an uncle right I don't know that a parent is going to jump in and say that and maybe that's an advantage I have not knowing the readers of my book in giving him this permission to do things that aren't necessarily pragmatic but anyway as uncle said you should start a restaurant and he took the test he never submitted the scores to a university and very soon thereafter enrolled in some vocational restaurant courses and took a job he took the first job he could get which was a front office job in a restaurant that was making about a tenth the salary that he was making in the sales job and went on to you know grammar see tap from all these iconic restaurants then shake shack then I mean yes dot dot dot yeah and we walked through in detail his path once he made this intention and one of the variables that my co-writer and I were looking for as we added stories to the book was this moment of intentionality we didn't want people that fell into a job and more success we want people that had made a decision usually a pivot they say I'm going to go do this now and once he had made that decision not only did he take that job but he took advantage of being in that restaurant to learn about the multiple functions but then he set up a tour through Europe as a style in multiple places where he's working for free basically I'm so glad you brought this up because I wouldn't have brought it up myself but this is going to relate in a second I've run a bunch of competitions for let's just say creating artwork for like PDFs slash like free books I'm going to put out or whatever and there's always a big hubbub where folks get some folks get very upset and they say oh you want people to work for free and I'm like well there's going to be a winner it's like if you don't want to participate don't participate but there's always this kind of shaking of the fist like I use so unfair you want people to work do work for free when I look at almost every example of someone who became the equivalent of Danny Meyer in their world they did a lot that was unpaid almost always I'm sure there are exceptions Staging is a great example in the restaurant world where it's like okay you want to work at a restaurant where you're going to have the highest density of learning and you don't know shit like guess what they probably don't want to pay you a whole lot because it's actually going to be a bit of a drain on their resources to show you around teach you how to work your station and do all this stuff so I would just encourage people to not be allergic to that and the way I got in a sense my foot in the door in Silicon Valley was I volunteered at tie the indiscent I volunteered at I volunteered with all of these nonprofit groups and quickly realized that most volunteers are doing the absolute minimum to be volunteers and if you just do 10% more it doesn't take much I would just refill people's water glasses and stuff after I finished taking their tickets for an event and suddenly the producers of this event were also doing it but had like real jobs I mean I had a job at a college sure and I was working a lot they were like wow this kids a go getter because he's refilling these water glasses let's give him more responsibility and that's how I ended up connecting with all these speakers and everything just did some stuff for free on the weekends it didn't take a lot there's a story in the book that's actually hard to believe we profile this woman Jen Ackens who's a hair stylist it's an incredible story but the one anecdote she's rising in her career and things are starting to work and she has jobs and she's getting paid she would go to fashion week in Paris and sneak in the back door and volunteer to do the hair of the models on stage like snuck in like not supposed to be there just to get reps with these top models in this environment it sounds unfathomable that someone would do that she did it multiple time and she did it yes what ended up happening after that I don't know her story oh she's become probably the most successful hair stylist of our time oh that's an incredible story how do you suggest people who are maybe they're doing AB&C right now they're listening to this and they say oh I want to take the leap I want to do Z I want to do whatever the off-menu option is yeah they might have to have a conversation with parent they might have to have a conversation with spouse and man have to have a conversation with who knows whoever the the most important people aren't in their lives how might they approach that and we're gonna talk about choosing paths in a second because I do have a question about maybe how to sanity check yourself in the world of AI but how do you suggest having those conversations do you moonlight for a while so it's not either or do you make time bound in a sense really hey just give me a permission to try this for six months a year or two years it's interesting I think any of those approaches is realistic we profile Sal Khan in the book of Khan Academy and he told his wife he wanted to go try it for a year he worked at a hedge fund just like Danny Meyer he was making real money I didn't realize that and started working with his cousins across the globe online doing these tutorial exercises and ended up posting a few on YouTube they started working and he told his wife I really want to go tilt at this he didn't even know what the business model was and he you know when change look I think the real test comes back to this passion element or we use a lot of different words because passions been kind of considered right but fascination curiosity like if you have this deep desire to know so much about this one thing that that curiosity so high I think the odds that that's not apparent to whoever these people are you trying to convince is pretty low because if you're going to tilt at something that hard and if you're going to really differentiate yourself by being that learned in that field I think it'd be hard for someone to tell you not to go do it it's not going to be easy and I don't want anyone to think that oh just read this book in magic happens like it requires effort and that's why this test matters so much this test of whether you would learn about this thing on your free time and maybe are you already learning are you already learning about it on your free time yes no doubt at least have one you should be you should be you I doubt you're going to turn it on history yeah well actually I have an example of someone who just turned it on we have a chapter called never too late which is where the Salcon thing is because that happened when he was close to 40 another local austenite hurt Tito beverage um started his endeavor in the spirit business oh wow I was just thinking about him while driving here for and no good reason at the age of 40 all right he's watching a PBS special this is also hard to believe he's watching a PBS special back when probably when there were only work channels or whatever but they said on the screen they said take a blank sheet of paper draw line down and put what you love to do on the left and what you're really good at on the right just a list of those things and then contemplate what might be in the middle and he had studied chemistry and a lot of stuff and he'd like going out to bars and socializing and he was making flavored vodka as Christmas presents in his spare toe what was his day job his first career was in size mythology and the oil field and yeah that dragged him to South America when that became dangerous both in midland and in South America he became a mortgage broker he didn't love either of yeah but the reason I brought it up when you said like already I don't know that he was already studying the spirit business but once he made that intentionality to go do this then he studied it writ large how did he start to stake your assay because I was just thinking about him Tito beverage just acquired Lala Tiquila yeah I was involved with yeah that's probably why he bought but how did he start he first started by just studying the distilling process writ large like read everything he possibly could and then it turns out there were no distilleries in the state of Texas and there were laws on the books that made it nearly impossible so then he had to study that and literally rewrite regulation to make it possible interestingly did the whole thing on credit cards so he owns a hundred percent of the business which is a huge business it's the single largest spirit sold in America did he realize that yes he realizes that big it's you you him yes so wild so wild I promise to get to this and I do want to get to it are there any sanity checks that you would put in place to complement the fascination slash obsession slash what I'm doing in my spare time or would pay to do or do for free like some wondering if there are any things you you would take off the table or how you would hone that given the rapidly developing technology of AI so if someone said you know what I love to do in my spare time is copy editing I might not suggest that they throw caution to the win and burn the ships and go into copy editing any thoughts the first thing I would note is that many of those pragmatic jobs that the well intentioned parents have been pushing their children towards are at risk yeah for sure so so comp-side right it's yeah risky but as compared to what right comp-side went from being the least risky major you could possibly get to one that's somewhat risky like overnight and so that'd be my first like notion and the second thing I would add to that which I already said is no matter what your endeavor is you need to be playing with this tool it's a modern tool it's the equivalent of a laptop and Microsoft Word was it's equivalent of what a calculator was but you don't want to go out in the world and play without the modern tool set it's a part of what you need if you're playing with those things and you're curious you know where the edges of whatever your passion about and what the technology's capable of yeah in order to find that edge and follow that edge right which will move you have to be playing with the tools one thing I love to suggest on the learning side is know the history and know the the new innovative edge if you bring both of those things to the table you are highly compelling that could be true even if you're not chasing your dream job even if you're just a marketing major if you walk into an interview at Clorox and you can simultaneously show that you've studied all the historical best marketers and you also understand how TikTok works that heavily differentiating in that interview like you're going to get the job I would argue versus someone else if you can portray those things how would you play that here is that just I guess field dependent or are you referring to AI I think AI is the leading edge of almost any industry so yeah I'm saying you should just study what it's capable of the thing that LLMs are most capable of it's a large language model the language type stuff you're copy adding example like things that were just wrote moving words around yeah it's really good at that stuff but it doesn't mean that you can't be the person that really understands what it's capable of and then superpower yourself to go attack a particular interest you it started a question by saying like warnings you know I think there are a lot of fields where talent really does matter like I don't know that I can make you a singer or I certainly can't make you an NBA basketball player but in all those fields whether it be Hollywood or sports you know even in Danny Meyer at one time thought he was going to be a chef and he just became a restaurant tour he wasn't a chef I would say that there for any artistic field there are way more jobs that support those artists than there are the jobs of the artist would you mean by that I mean we have an example in the book of a Hollywood agent and that individual had not thought about a job in Hollywood when they were growing up because they felt they couldn't act so they're like oh I can't go do that but there's tons of jobs I see you're saying in a Hollywood with the sector of entertainment it aren't the talent itself so if you're passionate about you know basketball or you're passionate about you know the chef example of a restaurant like there's tons of jobs you can go do music industry without being that particular person this makes me think of interview I was watching recently Patrick O'Shaughnessy invests with the best he was interviewing are you manual so famous super agent yep who force of nature his whole family is just like drinking different water I don't know what's going on there but he has raised a ton of money to invest in live events sports and so on as an anti AI or maybe AI anti-fragile bet there are lots of ways to make money when you raise a lot of money so I swear so putting that aside any other AI resilient or anti AI bets that you think are interesting outside of live events live sports I think a lot of the service industries I think humans enjoy experiences and I don't think that changes personally that much and so you know restaurant tours or hoteliers like I think all those things are gonna thrive and people that know how to really differentiate experiences in that way I don't share this thought that we're all gonna go watch movies that we've imagined that are made just for ourselves I find that hard to believe I think people enjoy great art in many different forms they enjoy talking about it and they enjoy the community element of having seen the same thing and so it may be that if you're a movie maker you're using AI instead of this expensive CGI toolset I think the storytelling and the imagination and the writing I think all those things will still be real I really do and obviously just general business entrepreneurship I took my dad who's 93 fly fishing in Montana this summer and we were at a lodge and one of the other guests who was staying there is a 28 year old entrepreneur from the tip of Texas down your corpus Christi area and he had started like three or four businesses and it was well off like I'm not saying but he was so enamored with AI he said I and then I needed this and then it did this and then I needed this and then it did it isn't and I wanted to know where to put the next one of these and I just ask it where would you put it in the city and it immediately gave me answers he goes this guy was already successful but he was running triple speed because he had tipped into this stuff and he was learning what was possible because he had an open mind towards it solving problems and I thought holy shit if other people kind of just leaned at it the way he's leaning at it they would become super powered themselves I was like really blown away by that yeah this makes me think of Kevin Rose Kevin Rose is spending the vast majority of his free time playing with all these tools by coding using them endlessly and I feel like that is probably over the next few weeks where I need to put some more time and just take a layup with wherever it happens to intersect with some place that makes it easy to apply who's Sam Hinky oh Sam Hinky is a gentleman that about I don't know six years ago became maybe the youngest GM in the history of the NBA he became the general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers why is this story relevant he was a amazing student he grew up in Oklahoma his father worked for Halliburton he made good grades good students kind of classic did everything right became a consultant I think he was working for McKinsey and they moved him to Australia and he's sitting there and he's reading other things in his spare time he's not reading about how to be a better consultant and he reads a book called Moneyball which yeah we all know of the Michael Lewis book about the Oakland A's and in almost what seems like an instant decided I really need to be in sports analytics I mentioned it a lot of the stories we found have this intentionality so that book just like the last laughed it for Simon Phil that book told him I'm gonna go do this and from the day he read that book just getting the job is ahead of GM of the 76ers was about 10 years so no experience whatsoever in the field to the youngest GM of all time in 10 years was he obsessed with sports already at that point I think so he played you know this gets back to what I said about maybe you your original obsession came from participating or being the talent but then you know he's not particularly big and so he was successful in high school but it wasn't you know there was no path to keep going down that field so yeah he had a mint passion for the category but it never imagined himself in the field you know in one of these other roles until that book kind of disinhibited him and gave him permission to think well you know what I could be differentiated on this dimension on this dimension of understanding analytics he immediately was applying to business school and he used that as a pivot point for those that have the needs and the resources I think an MBA programs can be a great place to switch careers and go chase a different dream and there's a great interesting anecdote in the book where he's trying to decide between Harvard and Stanford which is a choice most human quality problem yeah exactly but he went and told them both what he wanted to do and Harvard basically said well we don't really have any programs like that and Stanford to give Stanford a lot of credit said you know what that's super interesting we have this person associated with the school that does this we'll introduce you to these four people and we're a lot like Macon of Hastad you know when Sam brought him that challenge sounds about right that checks out for me yeah based on what you know the two institutions you know he ended up meeting Michael Lewis because he was in the Bay Area and some of the Stanford people knew Michael and so he talked to the guy that wrote the book that inspired him he hustled his ass off like I don't want to make it sound like he kind of built his own curriculum but it worked for people who are not going to get an MBA would you still suggest everyone read the first three chapters of Michael Porter's competitive strategy techniques for analyzing industries and questions all right anyone that's going to do anything in business should read that book all right I want to give the throwback first conversation by the way to back in the book I list about 50 books just it's a very interesting with the appetite but I think you did the same thing I love through your yeah oh no in fact I looked at yours for the structure when I wanted to see how to lay it out amazing amazing I want to get your expansion on avoiding false failures let me explain what I mean by that so there's this expression if you do what you love you'll never work a day in your life yeah right to my note my experience has been it's not always fun even if you're doing what you love sometimes there's burnout sometimes you go through chapters where things do feel like a grind maybe I'm an outlier but that's been my experience right when when I realized for instance in the case of the podcast it's like wow I have much more sponsored demand than I could ever fill if I just doubled the number of episodes I doubled the number of revenue yeah so I don't I do that and it started to feel like a bad job not a bad job I still a great job but the volume was too high and I can imagine if people take the expression I just mentioned right if you love what you do you never work a day in your life they pursue x whatever that is the songwriting in the case and the performing that gets above Dylan Danny Meyer whatever it might be and then they hit a really hard stretch yeah maybe it's early on maybe it's later maybe they're staging and so some French guy yelling at the case of the friend of mine yeah and they're like wow god you know this really feels painful maybe this isn't my path how do you distinguish between growing pains better temporary and an indication that you're not doing the right thing it's funny I'll take a short diversion and answering the question yes people often ask me you know how do you use that when I was wrapping up the book my publisher netted or said you know I want you to write the concluding chapter and I wrote what I think most people would do which is I just summarized the whole book and I submitted it to him and he said no this is no good and so then I went to chat gftd research mode and I said tell me about the 10 best nonfiction concluding chapters that you know and it went and did like a 20 page report and senate too and what I noticed in reading that was that the most of these great including chapters were orthogonal they weren't a summary they were the kind of a different take on the whole thing well my including chapters now titled it ain't easy to your point and I went through all of the stories that we have in the book and I pulled out the darkest hour moments for each one of those people and included it kind of at the end because I didn't want to leave people with the impression that it's just all smiles and babies and hugs I don't think that's true in any field and I guess my answer would be you know do you still feel this natural curiosity to learn the entire time is the impediment something that is truly means you should stop like I can't get around it is it something that maybe can be avoided something I can get around I push heavily on the pier thing because one of the things a pier group can do is help you in those moments both just from emotional support but also to put perspective on whatever this speed bump is and whether it's insurmountable or not mentors can help with that too but I think peers are better for that because you you worry about being judged in disclosing this yeah 100% and so peers like don't judge that's why that trust thing really matters also another reason why it matters I think they can help you determine whether that is as big a blocker as it may seem like but there's going to be some of that in any field I don't think there's any run it's just without paying I'm also imagining that one of the challenges that I had and some of my friends had at different points and pursuing film the blank starting our first companies just beginning to invest having a career in X right when I got at college it was mass data storage and hitting these really rough patches and feeling like you're the first person in the world to experience this and it's because of your unique flaws or uniquely bad decisions and I'm just realizing now I haven't tried this I'm sure it would work that you could just describe the dark chapter you're going through and to chat GPT or one of these tools and say give can you give me any comparable examples from other people who have succeed in another field I'm sure that it also give you five answers on how to deal with it or get a red but by the way one thing that's important when we're talking about this is Daniel Pink has this great book on regret and he talks about it as a valid motivator to get you to make good decisions and there is a reality that that anxiety may feel may mean you're not in the right lane and so when you were at that sales job you got to the point where you're like holy shit I don't want to be doing this anymore and I had two careers before I became a VC one as an engineer and one as a sales site analyst I enjoyed both I think I was good at both but I reached a point about three years in with each where I was like I don't want to do this the rest of my life and so I would say equally with like don't give up too early but if the signal is really telling you I don't want to do this the rest of my life jump out that's the precise moment to move on and try something new and I spend a ton of time in early chapters trying to get people to understand that's okay most people don't end up in a career that their major was like I think one of the reasons people grind too long is because they think they're supposed to they just think they're supposed to stay in this lane there how did you conclude it was time to hop in those cases we don't have to go into tons of the background because we talked about so much your history and decisions and so on including I don't want to say stealing paul and pilots but it's pretty good story about getting a paul and pilot but was it just a gut feeling was it like a disquiet that you felt in your system or was it more than that I'm sure I've overplayed it in my brain but they feel like very concrete moments where I had almost near certainty the first one was I started my third project at compact computer corporation where I was an engineer and the projects were these computers we were releasing and the third one was another computer with a little faster clock speed and a better Intel chip but the rest of it was all the same and we were going to do it again and I'm like that doesn't seem that interesting and I'd become curious about other things so when I was doing external learning which is what I refer to as this kind of spare time learning it wasn't that yeah you know it was something else I was reading Peter Lynch's book on stocks and stuff like that so right segue to the cell side analyst yes the thing that happened is a cell side analyst and this gets into and I made partly this into something from the Daniel Pink book but this notion of do you want to do this to rest of your life the cell side job is wonderful you get access so early in your life to some of the many amazing people but you have to work really hard and you know this classic thing where you're in your 20s and you're working on Wall Street you know they serve dinner at the office like the cafeteria is open now tell you something and it was like 10 30 or 11 p.m. and the entire research department was on the 36th floor of Park Avenue Plaza and I did a loop the four corner offices were the most senior analysts and for whatever reason I popped my head in each of their office and they were career cell side analyst I said do I want to be this person when I'm 60 it just stuck in my head I went to the next one went to the next one hopefully I don't know who those people were but I was like no I don't like that night that night I made the decision that I got to go do something else in Daniel Pink's book he talks a lot about boldness regrets and this is where I say do you want to do this the rest of your life he says one of the most robust findings in the academic research and my own is that over time we are much more likely to regret the chances we didn't take the chances we did what haunts us is the inaction itself for going opportunities all linger in the same way and he says that they studied this across China, Russia, Japan it's common across all of them and you may have heard of this YouTube video where Bezos talks about his regret minimization framework yeah yeah and so he had the same thing he's walking around central parks should I stay in this incredible job at D shower he's making tons of money or should I take this flyer on this online bookstore I want to do and he put it in his mind that test which is when I'm 80 and looking back I'm like I'm a regret not doing this you know well it makes me think of and this is also in a dicey proposition quoting Nicolomaki Valley but make mistakes of ambition not mistakes of sloth yes right the same thing and I do think about that a lot myself I mean I'm at a point where I'm trying to figure out my next chapters too because it's podcasting games getting pretty crowded and I still enjoy doing it but that's only because I refuse to kind of play by the incentives that the platforms and algorithms provide which is like economically punishing but intellectually rewarding so because you've had two successful careers is not just a podcast or influencer but as an angel investor I would I would encourage you read Arthur Brooks book strength to strength I did I did it was great it was great it was great it was great I think it gives great perspective for kind of a later career yeah yeah I should go back and and look at my notes from that book again so let's chat for a second people should all check the sound I mean you're you're such an operator track records incredible running down a dream how to thrive in a career you actually love we'll talk about that again we'll mention it again at the end what do you want to do after this book menu you can't sit on your hands very long no and I as I mentioned when I made the decision to stop the venture career which I think we talked about on the last podcast a little bit of red to Steve Martin book but I didn't know I knew I want to do something else and I went on a listening tour and I can you just reiterate what a listening tour is oh I just I identified several people who had kind of successfully retired just strong word but made a decision to stop doing a job they were very successful at and then what do you do now and it's similar to the art to Brooks book but it was just a personal and a lot of people angel invest a lot of people going boards a lot of people manage their own money I had this list and people teach and I slowly was checking them off like scratching them out yeah like man don't really want to manage my own money don't really want to angel best they don't want to start my own venture firm have done that and so I found myself crossing them all off and I couldn't discover something that got me excited and tied into this what are you doing with your external learning thing and slowly I've come around to an idea that I made up so it's not a career that other people have but I think I'd like to start a policy institute I've come up with a name P3 which stands for purpose progress and prosperity when I was doing the BG2 podcast which I recently stepped away from we did a episode at the Diablo Canyon nuclear facility and before I did that episode I spent three or four weeks calling everyone I knew to make sure that I was prepared for that and that was one of our more successful episodes and I just really enjoyed that I look at the shifting mindset around the global nuclear energy in the past five years as an example of what's possible with really great policy work and it wasn't one person I think you know the fact that Steve Pinker was banging the drum was super important but you know and Dresan and Elon and all these people started pounding that same drum Joe Gebi his wife made this like a big life passion project the worst but it's shocking how quick we went from this stuff's bad to oh no we made a mistake it's actually good and that could have a powerful impact on the planet and so I don't know how many of those type things are hard to find I don't want to go grind on state by state legislation I don't have any interest in that but looking at big problems looking at US China relations US healthcare system has some massive problems can you come up with ideas that help shift these things and I've already got to know some really innovative professors who are thinking in very innovative ways and I look to use my financial capabilities to do grant writing through people like that see what we can go do see we can go change regulatory captures and other one that I've spent time tilting it so could you elaborate on what if you're not doing the state by state legislative change what does the work of p3 potentially look like what is policy working that seems like a silly question but like we're day one so but I'll give you what might it look like yeah here's an example a professor approached me on the regulatory capture front what if we could you define that just for people who didn't hear episode yeah so there's a Nobel Prize winner from the University of Chicago named George Stigler he's passed away but who made the very strong argument that regulation is the friend of the incumbent that large businesses learn how to lobby Washington and no matter how well intentioned the policy is that passed it ends up benefiting the incumbent more than restricting the incumbent and he want a Nobel Prize for that work I gave a speech at the all in summit that you can go watch on YouTube has like five million views on this topic but I think this happens in the majority of the time this YACH takes three days to get there right yes yes yes but stablecoin may solve that but this professor approached me about making a global database that scores countries on how capture they are and that identifies the best practices from the countries that have the best scores that kind of thing like investing in that type of data and transparency is pretty compelling to me that's an example of what I might go do let me chew on that for a second so let's say you create this data set that presents these scores on a country by country basis what are the hoped for outcomes of that that countries that have worse scores start to model the countries with better scores certainly there might be talent flight from one place to another I mean we already see that in some respects I mean there's not purely regulatory capture determined when you share that data what would the hope be the hope would be that you can shine a light on the best practices and try to get those implemented in other places in the U.S yeah that would be the hope and also I think just shining a light on them I'll give you an example that relates to regulatory capture after you've been a senator or congressman for a while you get invited on the committees yep the minute you're on a committee you are in charge of regulation that affects different industries well what happens I don't even know if most humans know this what happens is your local senator or your local congressman who you think is representing your district now starts raising money national they go around and meet with businesses that because they're on that committee and have influence and they're raising money nationally like I think that's ridiculous personally and you could imagine restrictions against that transparency towards it like if your congressman represents this zip code in Austin wouldn't you want to know if they're raising money in Minnesota isn't that a little unusual well you shared a story last time we spoke about being asked to raise 100 grand in donations just to get a meeting with the congress yes yes yes our mutual friend Rich Barton talks about shining flashlights in dark places this technology that we have access to I think donations should be on the blockchain quite frankly like there's no reason why this information needs to be in the dark I think there's a lot of opportunity around data aggregation any other ideas that are percolating I'm enamored by a state versus state competition part of it pops into my brain from the china experience and the provincial competition right but you know you see new summon abbot you know fighting back and forth and maybe there can be a positive outcome from this and I think some of the federalist papers kind of envisioned that different states could try different experiments and we could see what happens as a result to that but it's seeing some of it we are seeing some of the things in every pretty interesting and provocative and could lead to positive change I'd love to see I have this dream that some state and maybe this state that we're sitting in that has a surplus would do something crazy with teacher salaries like what if a state just all of a sudden said we're going to pay 50% more for teachers yeah think about the dynamic that would create pretty wild would be so maybe I'll go tilt it down too so other problems on your mind well it's present a list here from some prep notes we have US health care regulatory capture intellectual property US China fairness and financial markets US k-12 could you speak to intellectual property and fairness and financial markets how you might be thinking about those intellectual property is I got to be at top 10,000 percent to a supporter of open source yeah and this gets back to Ridley's book the rational optimist but he talks about prosperity comes when ideas have sex and just the sharing of information in my mind should be free that it shouldn't cost anything and it's very unclear to me that the patent system actually adds value I'm quite doubtful that the human mind wouldn't innovate if it didn't come with a 17 year financial protection like I just I'm doubtful of that there's great scientists at every university working on problems that aren't necessarily being patented and your ability for hyper competition and innovation is so much higher when there aren't restrictions place I think the world's a better place when ideas are are shared and not protected since the system we're working with is the system we're currently working with how might something like drug development work without patent protection here's an interesting thing the NIH gives out 40 billion dollars a year and a lot of that money goes to companies that end up getting venture capital back I've had some very open fights with people about this yeah so why doesn't an NIH grant come with an open source rider yeah and so if the VCs want a fund with federal funding for prior yeah it's federal funding yeah I agree with that and right now there's a big fight over whether just their research papers have to go on non-private networks instead of the private ones are on today I mean they just want the information out there like that's a minor step I would consider a major step and you don't have to take the money why is the US government giving people money that ends up becoming proprietary inventions that makes no sense to me the US government or individual philanthropists or foundations I mean on some level if that then at some point I agree with that but are there industries that I mean the only one that first came to mind was drug development where they all cry the VCs will tell you it'll never work no one will have any incentive if we don't have a 17 year protection the entire Silicon Valley I'm not saying no I know I just I've lived in a world where if someone comes into our office and talks about patents we roll our eyes because none of the types of businesses that we've backed at Benchmark and Silicon Valley are ever about patents Elon has famously opened source dollars Tesla patents like such a bold thing to do and so gracious I think really to society but his point is oddly I was talking to Ted Cruz about this and he said yeah Elon thinks the same thing like he views the edge of competition is how fast are you moving how greater your products the consumers love them not can I defend them in a court of law and the protection that the drug guys get is so much no one can really use software pens to like get protection algorithm or something like no one even tries but with drugs if I have this particular genome sequence all of a sudden like I get this huge proprietary window in the market it's just nutty this is not exactly the same thing but what a service to humanity I was just watching I think the documentary and people can watch it for free on YouTube and other places the thinking game about deep mind and demos and his team releasing alpha fold I mean structures of these proteins and he's like oh my god what an incredible well there's an issue for you man right there the original paper they wrote was open source and open AI doesn't exist without that discovery with chaffin that Google yeah in open source you know they just exploited it to fastest yeah wild and by the way this I mean not to divert too much back but right now China has 10 open source AI models they're all in hyper competition with each other that is a dangerously effective primordial soup for innovation compared to what we have here how does even like you probably know this but I don't how does China handle what are the policies around and laws around inflexible property interestingly I found a document online that someone had put together a PowerPoint about the history of open source at China and it's 20 years old so it's not like they just stumbled into it yeah I think when you consider that you know go back 20 years ago the primary criticisms of China was that they stole IP and so if you're the Chinese government and there's this new thing called open source you're going to embrace it because there's no fault there because everyone's sharing and everyone and so you know if you look at the big open source projects Linux my skew on you go on the web pages like you'll see Ali Baba you know Tencent like these companies have been supporting these technologies for a while but every five years they write this five-year plan you know the Chinese government puts it out five years ago they had a huge section on open source so they're clearly suggesting to the entrepreneurs that the government favors that approach and going back to rid these book and the notion of pure competition I think this is a rational optimist yeah I think the society benefits from that I use this example imagine there's two feudal societies that are all agricultural based there's two of them though and one once a week the farmers come to market and just trade goods and then they leave and the other one the farmers come to market and they're required to share their best practices with everybody else and then they leave going back to this pure kind of example in the book that one's going to be much more performant than the other one and this gets to Ridley's point about ideas having sex I mean obviously it's also we talked about this a decent amount in our last conversation but it can be used as an incredible strategy or counter punch from for profit companies like Android I mean my god I mean it's like you can do a lot it's an incredibly powerful tool I think did using open source as a defensive tool instead of an offensive tool is one of the most sophisticated corporate strategies company can possibly do it's very hard to do because it goes against all of your instincts but I would suggest that Amazon and Apple and maybe meta who has toyed with it should run at the idea of jointly supporting an open source model I don't think they're doing it but I think they should because they're incumbentcies at risk if someone else has a massive proprietary advantage fairness in financial markets what does that mean you know I've been tilting against this insider's game of the IPO market for some time and I'm very passionate did when you bring a company that luxury of retirement or maybe I mean if you tilt against the investment banks you got to be comfortable not going to conferences that's for sure they also really nice funds and so you fall off the invite yes real quick the way did an IPO is price is so god awful stupid they pick who gets the stock and they pick the price and I've said it over and over again but a freshman comp size student and a freshman finance student if you told them to design the IPO they would just match supply and demand anonymously like it's how every bond is priced it's interestingly how every initial coin offering works and so I've become a late to the game crypto enthusiast because I'm so sick of this damn IPO process being broken could you say a bit more about how it's broken like this walks through a hypothetical example of why it's broken yet when the company's coming public the bankers literally they ask everyone from orders but then they pick who gets the stock and they pick the price supply and demand can automatically pick the allocation and the price it's not automatically the wrong word can algorithmically like this is super easy like it's not hard why don't they do it that way because they're handing free money to their clients there we go that's what I was looking at yeah no it's been known for a long time I uncover an email from 1999 at Goldman Sachs which I've posted on Twitter several times where they're like saying oh we can use this hot stock to reward our top clients like they know what's going on and the fact that the SEC doesn't get involved really bothers me but this tokenization thing is a real way to get around it because the crypto communities already decided they use algorithms to allocate and determine price like the price and the allocation should just be to turn it's how direct listing works like everyone knows how to do it they just don't do it you know it's horrible there's other things too in this category the long kind of prevalence of visa master card is just ridiculous two and a half percent and stablecoins have so much momentum right now I just think those two companies are going to be in real trouble within a five year window by the way most of the financial problems are pure regulatory capture like the reason that there's a problem and just to tell me if I'm explaining this well some not sure we said it this directly but basically the incumbents helped to write laws and regulations that favor them and prevent newcomers after a nine we wrote this thing god frank like and we thought oh we're going to make things better and all you've had is consolidation and banking sense and if you look at the offering especially the low end for the poorest citizens of the US like free checking win away the poor people have a hard time paying their bills they don't even have the tools to do it because free checking win a free checking win away after Dodd frank right so just to please push back from oversimplifying this but regulatory capture is not just bad for startups and Silicon value hope to grow and disrupt and fill in the blank it's also bad for everybody oh it's horrible for consumers I mean the US health care situation which seems to be getting worse on a daily basis is a huge example of regulatory capture somewhere in the past 10 years they just told physicians they can't run hospitals who other than a doctor is going to go start a new hospital the amount of competition you eliminated in this one swoop is enormous just enormous that's just a single example but there's hundreds of them in that in that area what would success be for this book six months after it comes out what will the YouTube have been happy with putting the time in let's take it a while yeah that's taking a lot of work what do you hope the outcome will be it really started as a passion project and I have no financial goals for whatsoever in fact I'm gonna as we get the book launch I'm gonna launch a foundation that gives grants to people who want to chase their dream job but don't have the financial where was all to do it and so I'm gonna start working on that in addition to p3 for me it's all about you know how many people do I affect in the way that mcconnais dad did or that did this book did for sin felt like some of them saw the talk on YouTube from the UT presentation that I gave and I've already reached out and said thank you and they've shared how change your life but the more people I can do that for I would just be tickled pink I'd just be so excited because I think when people get out of this pragmatic lane and go do these types of things they tend to be unusually successful which I think then has a bigger impact than just on them themselves the number of humans positively impacted by Danny Myers success is in the thousands I'm certain that I'm not counting customers or fake shag

so people check it out I love you writing bill you're not just a commentator right you've been an operator you've observed a lot of operators studied outliers and people who've chosen X instead of a b or c the book is running down a dream how to thrive in a career you actually love check it out folks you look and find you on X at b girly of course they want to see just a landing page they can go to benchmark anywhere else you'd like to point people or anything else you'd like to mention before we start to plan a plan thank you so much for your time yeah thanks bill and for everybody watching and listening we will have a link to everything we mentioned we mentioned a lot of things and a lot of references and resources just go to Tim.plogSlash podcast you can check all that out and until next time as always be a bit kinder than it's necessary to others and to yourself but look for X when people give you a b or c or when you think you're limited to a bnc till next time thanks do you know. Hey guys this is Tim again just one more thing before you take off and that is five bullet Friday would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday that provides a little fun before the weekend between one and a half and two million people subscribed to my free newsletter my super short newsletter called five bullet Friday easy to sign up easy to cancel it is basically a half page that I send out every Friday to share the coolest things I've found or discovered or have started exploring over that week it's kind of like my diary of cool things it often includes articles on reading book some reading albums perhaps gadgets gizmos all sorts of tech tricks and so on they get sent to me by my friends including a lot of podcast guests and these strange esoteric things end up in my field and then I test them and then I share them with you so if that sounds fun again it's very short a little tiny bite of goodness before you head off for the weekend something to think about if you'd like to try it out just go to tim.blog slash friday type that into your browser tim.blog slash friday drop in your email and you'll get the very next one thanks for listening not to be a salty old dog but in the early two thousand it's back in the day when I was running my own e-commerce business the tools were atrocious they try it hard when man was it bad did to cobble all sorts of stuff together I could only dream of a platform like Shopify Shopify is the commerce platform behind millions of businesses around the world and now 10% of all e-commerce in the US is on Shopify now back to the early two thousand then nobody even thought of AI who could have predicted even in the last 24 months the magic that is now possible with AI Shopify has been ahead of the curve and they are packed with helpful AI tools that will accelerate everything right product descriptions page headlines even enhance your product photography best of all Shopify expertly handles everything for managing inventory to international shipping processing returns and beyond if you're ready to sell you're ready for Shopify sign up for your one dollar per month trial and start selling today at shopify.com slash Tim one more time that's shopify.com slash Tim in 2026 stop waiting and start selling with Shopify so our place reached out to me as a potential sponsor and the first thing I did was look at the reviews of their products and said send me one and that is the titanium always pan pro and the claim is that it's the first non-stick pan with zero coating so that means zero for ever chemicals and durability that'll last forever. I was very skeptical I was very busy so I said you know what I want to test this same quickly I'm going to test it with two things I'm going to test it with scrambled eggs in the morning and then I'm going to test it with a steaks here and it worked perfectly in both cases and the design is really clever it does combine the best qualities of stainless steel cast iron and non-stick into one product and now our place is expanding this first of its kind technology to their titanium pro cookware sets which are made in limited quantities so if you are looking for non-toxic long lasting pots and pans that outperform everything else in your kitchen just head to our place dot com save an extra 10% off holiday sale prices on titanium cookware from our place with code save 10 Tim head to from our place dot com to see why more than a million people have made the switch to our place kitchenware and with their 100 day risk free trial free shipping and free returns you can shop with total confidence check it out from our place dot com
