---
title: '#849: Dr. Michael Levin — Reprogramming Bioelectricity, Updating "Software"
  for Anti-Aging, Treating Cancer Without Drugs, Cognition of Cells, and Much More'
pub_date: '2026-01-21'
podcast: The Tim Ferriss Show
---

Hello boys and girls ladies and germs. This is Tim Ferris. Welcome to another episode of the Tim Ferris show. My guest today has been years in the making. I'm so excited to have this conversation and share it with you. His name is Dr. Michael Levin. He is the fan of our Bush distinguished professor of biology at Tufts University and director of the Allen Discovery Center. We cover so much ground in this conversation and I think a few years from now, even currently depending on the scientist you speak with, but a lot of folks are going to look back and say, wow, Michael Levin got it right. He in his lab, the people working in the lab, did such important research that redefined how we think about biology, how we think about cancer, how we think about the ability to reprogram the human body using bioelectricity. And it goes well beyond DNA. That's part of the story, but it's not the full story and we get into a lot of it. His background is in computer science and biology and he has been developing a framework for recognizing and communicating with unconventional cognitive systems. And we'll describe and define what all of this means. Applied to the collective intelligence of cell groups undergoing morphogenesis, these ideas have allowed the Levin lab to develop new applications and birth defects, organ regeneration and cancer suppression. His lab also produces synthetic life forms, for instance, Zena bots and anthropods that serve as exploration platforms for understanding the source of patterns of form and behavior in a wide range of natural artificial and hybrid embodied minds. Okay, what does that all mean? We'll get into it. Don't worry. We define everything. You can find his blog at thoughtforms.life. I highly encourage you to check it out. And then the lab website is dr dr michael levin.org and on x he is dr michael levin. And just one quick disclosure, I did invest in a startup based on some of michael's research in 2023. I've been interested in his work for longer than that. But we don't even really get into discussing the startups and my hope in sharing this conversation with you because it's really the first in depth conversation he and I have ever had, which is wild, is to explore what I think I suppose the future looks like we're peering around corners. It combines very well with my conversation that I had with dr brian Tracy and thinking about sort of microchips and electricity over pills and potions and things of that type. And it's not necessarily either or but man, I do think there is an incredible new world and future ahead of us within medicine. And honestly, it extends beyond that into how we think about cognition and even consciousness itself. So all that having been said without further ado, please enjoy a very, very fun. I had a blast conversation with dr michael levin. I think this is how the two I can run flat out for a half mile before my hands start shaking. Can I also you pass some questions? Now I just see it in a perfect time. What if I did the alpha? I'm a cybernetic organism living tissue over metal, endless color. Leading to Paris show. Mike, very nice to finally connect. Yeah, wonderful. Thanks for making the time. Of course. Yeah, thanks for having me. We have lots of ground to explore. And I thought we would begin with a book that had a spot on my bookshelf when I was a kid. It seems like you and I may have found it at the same time, but you did a lot more with it than I did. The author is Robert O. Becker. Is that enough of a cue? I think they did it off. I think it was. All right. What is the book and why is it relevant? I'm going to guess it's the body electric. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Yeah, it's very relevant. I discovered it in an old bookstore that my dad and I visited when I was in Vancouver, Canada for the world's fair in 86. And I found this thing and it's kind of a patchwork of a number of different things, right? Like he was into applied field dangers and things like that. But I was just stunned with all the references to prior work that revealed to me that the kinds of things I'd been thinking about were actually real and that people had investigated it. And that book, I guess Dr. Becker was an orthopedic surgeon and he was effectively penning a scientific memoir describing experiments involving salamanders and other animals exploring the role of electricity and many, many different aspects of biology. How would you define for folks bioelectricity? What is a helpful way to define that term? And then we'll probably hop to the video in a sense that introduced me to your work, which I will not be alone inciting. But let's begin with the definition bioelectricity. What is that? Well, bioelectricity in general is the way that living systems exploit physics in particular, the physics of electricity to do the amazing things that living systems do. And there are roughly speaking two kinds of bioelectricity. There's the familiar kind, which is studied by neuroscience. And so this is the electrical activity of the cells in your brain. And I think everyone has a rough understanding of the fact that the reason you know things that your individual neurons don't know and that you have beliefs and the preferences and so on that are more than just any of the neurons in your head is through this amazing cognitive glue that electricity provides, right? It binds your neurons into a collective intelligence that underlies our mind. So that's the bioelectricity that everybody's familiar with. And then there's the other kind also called developmental bioelectricity, which you can get to by asking about where did the brain come from and where did it learn those amazing tricks and very quickly realize that while some of these things have been around for a very long time long before we had brains and neurons. And that the question of what does your body think about before it has a brain? What how does it use electricity? Is the study of developmental bioelectricity? The video that I was referencing you will not be surprised to hear was an older TED talk and then subsequent interview on stage and that was sent to me by Adam Goldstein. So now it's off max. And that was probably several years ago, I would say at this point that it was sent to me. Could you perhaps, and I know a lot has happened since, but could you describe some of the experiments that you covered at TED to give people an idea of how this. This becomes tangible right this conversation of bioelectricity becomes tangible when we look at biology we see lots of amazing things for example in a salamander if they lose a limb they regenerate the limb. And they stop when it's complete. And in fact there are many other interesting kinds of things that when anybody looks at it the first thing they ask is how does it know to do that. One of the things I discussed that video was if you scramble the craniofacial organs of a tadpole they still make a pretty normal frog all they sort themselves out they move in new paths until they get to a normal frog face and then they stop. So anybody sees that and the immediately the question is okay, but how do they know what a proper frog face look like. And if you do know then how do you know how to get from here to there right how do you navigate. So the way we're all taught in biology is that that's a bad question we are told none of these things know anything they are mechanical machines that sort of roll forward according to rules of chemistry. And in the end some cool stuff happens and we'll call it emergence and things like that and complexity science will sort of catalog them. But don't worry none of these things actually know anything that's just what they do. So what I was trying to describe in that talk is this idea that chemical processes can in fact know things it's not magic it's not mysterious and we are chemical processes that know things and we've had for many decades mature science of including cybernetics and control theory and things like that mature science of figuring out how it is that machines of all different kinds can know things and they can have goals and so on. So what I try to show in that talk are some examples by which the living tissues for example platforms that are cut into pieces and every piece has to figure out how many heads should I have where to the heads go right how many you know what should the shape of my face be these kinds of things that in fact they do know. And the way they know is because they store memories and maybe not shockingly although it's certainly shocking to a lot of folks the way those memories are stored is in an electrical network that is very similar to the way that we store our goal directed behavioral repertoire is in our brain and that these things are sort of widely spread and so regeneration cancer suppression and cancer repair and remodeling birth defects and birth defect repair all of these things are extensively using electrical pattern memories and we now have a way to rewrite those pattern memories. I've been so excited to have you on the show because I am an intrepid muggle kind of blindly half blindly exploring science to the extent that I can every once in a while I'll share a resource like I did recently this multi part series called the gene this is a Ken Burns produced documentary about genetics the history of genetics starting with Mendel and so on working all the way up to modern biotech but the underlying. Framework for that entire series is DNA as master copy let's call it then RNA then protein and that's kind of how it works right you have this blueprint that is executed upon and that produces what we see in the world on some level but as I understand it you by manipulating bi electricity have produced for instance animals that have two heads that. And that trait persists over generations and maybe I'm getting the specifics wrong but that is not by virtue of manipulating DNA and I'm just wondering what's if I'm first of all getting that right but secondly. What that says about how we might be revising our understanding of biology and what the textbooks might look like in a five or 10 years from now or further out. You're not wrong I could list any number of scenarios that we and others have studied in which the genetics not only don't tell the whole story but in fact tell a fairly misleading story. And the way that I would describe it and there are two pieces to this and I'll do the simpler piece first and we can we can talk about the other piece the simpler piece is we can get there by thinking about the distinction between software and hardware and by the way I should preface this because because some people get really upset about this I am not saying that the current. Way that we think about software and hardware is sufficient to get everything we need from biology does not cover all of biology covers one important piece of biology. Reprogram ability is really critical and so if you wanted to make that same movie about computers for example you could make a movie that basically goes. Electric fields silicon and germanium. And transistors and the flow of energy through circuits done that could be your movie and it's not an unimportant part of the story it's very important part of the story but the critical part that that doesn't get to is that's the hardware and in fact that's what the genome does so the genome tells every cell what the hardware is going to be so the genome gives every cell the little tiny sort of protein level hardware that it gets to have. But now comes the other interesting part which is the reprogram ability and we've known for very long time now that if your hardware is good enough and the biological hardware is more than good enough then that hardware is reprogramable so what happens just as an example what happens in these flatworms these two head of flatworms that you were referring to. The flatworm has a bioelectric memory in it and we can see it i'm saying these things because we can now see these memories and we can rewrite them at will so this is you know this is now actionable in the lab. It has a bioelectric memory that says one head that memory is not genetically encoded what is genetically encoded is a bunch of hardware that when you first turn on the juice it basically acquires that memory as a default when you buy a calculator from the store and you turn on the power they all say zero right reliably 100% of the time they all say zero great but that zero is not the only thing that that circuit can do right as you find out very quickly they can store memory into all these things the genetic hardware of the worm. Is very good at making sure that everywhere starts out with a very specific it's a little bit I think related to instinct and how you know certain birds are born knowing how to make nest and things like that the hardware has defaults and by default one head but the hardware is reprogrammable so we were able to do is go in and identify the memory that actually says how many heads and we can change it and when you change it you don't need to change the hardware you don't need to change the genetics anymore then when we form new memories you don't need to change the genes in your brain to form new memories I always say. To people on your laptop if you want to go from Photoshop to Microsoft word you don't get out your soldering iron and start rewiring it be laughable if you have to but that's how we used to do it in the 40s and 50s you program a computer by pulling and plugging wires well you don't do that anymore because it's reprogrammable and that's what the biology is and so that's the first thing and the second thing just very quickly and we can get into it if you want is that the cellular intelligence that exists not only is reprogrammable but it is actually creative in the sense that it interprets. The DNA and we can talk about this it doesn't blindly do what the DNA says and this is kind of a deep thing because it's the way our cognition works to it interprets memories in a way that is improvisational it does not simply follow what they say counter to what we all learn.

Just a quick thanks to our sponsors and will be right back to the show. So our place reached out to me as a potential sponsor and the first thing I did was look at the reviews their products and said send me one and that is the titanium always pan pro and the claim is that it's the first non stick pan was zero coding so that means zero forever chemicals and durability that'll last forever I was very skeptical I was very busy so I said you know what I want to test this thing quickly I'm going to test you with two things I'm going to test it with scrambled eggs in the morning. And then I'm going to test it with a steaks here and it worked perfectly in both cases and the design is really clever does combine the best qualities of stainless steel cast iron and non stick into one product and now our place is expanding this first of its kind technology to their titanium pro cookware sets which are made in limited quantities so if you're looking for non toxic long lasting pots and pans that outperform everything else in your kitchen. Just head to our place dot com save an extra 10% off holiday sale prices on titanium cookware from our place with code save 10 Tim head to from our place dot com to see why more than a million people have made the switch to our place kitchenware and with their 100 day risk free trial free shipping and free returns you can shop with total confidence check it out from our place dot com. Life in general can be chaotic but if you're managing order fulfillment for an ecommerce business you know that it's own special kind of crazy chaos I've been there fortunately you can relax with today's sponsor ship station with ship station you never have to worry about shipping and fulfillment again whether you're running a business out of your garage as I once did or you have multiple warehouses ship station is for every phase of your businesses growth save hours and money by automating repetitive tasks and get the best

shipping rates from global carriers ship stations industry leading scalable features help you deliver a better customer experience by ensuring accuracy faster shipments and automated tracking updates and with up to 88% off UPS and USPS rates and up to 90% off FedEx rates it's the most affordable way to ship so calm the chaos switch to ship station started free trial at ship station dot com slash Tim that ship station dot com slash Tim.

So I'm going to come back to this sort of how the textbooks might be revised question in a minute but before we get there you said we can see memories right so you this is empirically demonstrable in the lab what does it mean to see those memories what is that actually mean and look like and then secondly with the flatworms with the two heads why does that persist if it does into future generations so what we can see directly are the biological properties of tissue. We've developed tools using voltage sensitive fluorescent dies and so that means you take your embryo or your tissues or whatever you've got and you soak it in this special chemical that glows different degrees or different wavelengths depending on what the local voltages and so back in the olden days in electrophysiology you had an electrode and you would have to poke like a little needle and you would poke every cell and you would get the voltage reading we still do that for certain purposes but what you can now do is get a full map of the whole tissue all at once and in fact you can make movies of it and watch a change over time. And we have these amazing videos of embryos changing their electrical activities over time it's basically like what neuroscientists do when they do imaging and brains but we can do it in the rest of the body so there what you see are the electrical patterns are from there you have to do a lot of experiments to prove that what you're looking at are in fact memories and there are many different kinds of things we do but functionally what you have to show is that you can decode the electrical pattern that you're seeing and show that what it encodes is the future set points towards which the cells will work in other words I can take into one headed worm I can change the voltage pattern it's still a one headed worm but it's internal representation of what a correct worm should look like now says two heads you don't see it because it's a latent memory but when you cut the thing into pieces now what the cells do is consult the memory and they say oh two heads and then they build two heads and you get your two headed worm so you don't know right away when you first looking at it you don't know that that's a memory you have to do experiments to prove that that's what it actually is. And then the persistence the durability over generations the process of regeneration and repair in general is kind of homeostatic process what's like a thermostat you have a set point if the temperature gets too low it tries to go up if it gets too high it tries to come down it tries to keep a certain that is exactly what happens in the body which is anatomical homeostasis so cells come and go all the time right so the ship we're kind of a ship of feces right in many ways so cells and materials come and go sometimes drastic kinds of injuries for animals that regenerate past them embryogenesis I mean look half our population can regenerate an entire body from one cell I mean that's amazing right that's an amazing development embryonic development is an incredible example of regeneration the whole body regenerating from just one excel. And in all of those cases what needs to happen is just like a thermostat has to remember what's the right set point that has to be memory mechanism that stores it and so the electric circuits in the body that store these patterns they have a memory property as well such that when you change it it stays. Now sometimes there are multiple memories and so we've done things like for example in these flatworms there are different species that have different shaped heads round ones triangular ones flat ones we've shown that you can take a worm. Change the biological signaling and get it to grow ahead of a different species but the fun thing about that is it grows the head of a different species you haven't touched the genetics by the way again the genomes totally wild so while right but it'll grow the head of a different species and it'll stay there for about 30 days and then it goes back to it's not permanent unlike the two head of thing is permanent that that never changes but the head shape after about 30 days they go back and so clearly there are multiple there's more than one there's sort of met a some kind of metacognomy. And so that's a different kind of thing that says yeah you know I know you thought that was your memory but actually that's wrong it sort of overrides some kind of error correction thing which we haven't cracked yet so there are kind of layers upon layers. All right so for people who are listening and wondering how this translates or might translate to humans I want to get there but I'm going to bridge to that simply by saying that this topic of bio electricity is long been interesting to me I mean it's been interesting to humans for a very long time going back to the end of the day. So I'm going to go back to slaves and ancient Rome stepping on electric yields and finding relief from count but in a more modern incarnation I had Dr. Kevin Tracy on the podcast some time ago who was is incredibly well cited played a part after his experiences with patients with septic shock identifying TNF alpha and a lot of subtleties around that and has developed hardware in this case I mean they're programmable but for Vegas predominantly for at this point autoimmune disorders like rheumatoid arthritis and so on but you can see some incredible incredible clinical effects. And we're just touching the tip of the iceberg so I'm wondering it took a long time to get here though even with something that is relatively I would say straightforward to identify which is the Vegas nerve aka Vegas nerves these sort of intercontinental cables running down either side of the neck with 100,000 fibers on either side. So in this case we're talking about flatworms we could certainly talk about other species that are known for regeneration but broadly speaking what might this mean for humans how might this be applied to humans do humans have this programable layer just as some of these other species do what might there are putics or more for pseudicals or otherwise look like that's a great connection you can work is amazing I was just talking to him a couple weeks ago like it's awesome stuff yeah great guy great guy yeah he really is so a couple of things to explain why this is relevant to humans and then I'll give you like three broad areas of application. The reason it's absolutely relevant to humans is that we are all basically built on fundamentally the same principles people have this idea that well frogs are sort of a lower creature but you know we're where mammals and once you get past yeast and things like that we are all roughly the same for as far as this stuff goes these kind of electrical signals were evolution discovered them around the time of bacterial biofilms very long ago and so this is all very well conserve and for that reason for example there are human mutations in ion channels. In ion channels that are birth defects so if you mutate ion channels in humans you get birth defects just like we see in in frog and and chicken zebrafish and things like that so those are all well conserved and with David Kaplan who is a collaborator of mine at toughs we've done a bunch of work on biodectors of human mesenchymal stem cells so this stuff works for humans as well it is not some like frog of platform specific thing this is very very broad I should say this is a display where I always have to do you mentioned more pseudicals so there are a couple of spin off companies that have licensed some of this technology so I need to do that. To sort of say that as a disclosure so one is specifically called more pseudicals this a company that pushing forward our limb regeneration work in bioelectrics and then there's also this other company called astonishing labs that is doing some of the stuff in aging and so on having said all that I firmly believe that these things are heading for clinical application in humans and probably not that far off I hope here are the three applications so the first application is birth defects we have shown that we can repair a number of different birth defects of the brain the face the heart what else the gut yeah these these kinds of things you buy restoring correct bioelectrical patterns in vivo and so this is now in in animal models we are moving of course to more clinical kinds of things and I hope in the future this will absolutely be of human application so that's what the best way to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do that is to do implications or experiments, or just maybe conceptual frameworks that are sort of do as a revision of what we've thought to date. First of all, one of the things that we've seen is that, and by the way, this is fairly recent work, so this is in no way is this the final story. This is just kind of what we know now. I'm sure this will be updated. Over time, the electrical prepatterns that tell the cells and tissues what large scale structure we're supposed to look like, they get fuzzy. They degrade over time. Much like what we do with birth defects is we try to reinforce the correct patterns, and this is one of the ways we're addressing aging as well, is by reinforcing these patterns. Now, one question you might ask is, why over time are these things getting fuzzy, right? What's going on? There are a couple of schools of thought. One is that this is the consequence of accumulated noise and damage. Molecular damage, entropy, basically. Over time, you just accumulate damage, and everything kind of gets degraded over time. There's also these kind of, what they call, programmatic theories, where basically the idea is that you program to age for whatever reason evolution is favored, a decline, and death. We have an interesting third alternative to offer, which is the following. We did a simulation experiment where we had a virtual body where the cells cooperate together to build an embryo. They work really hard to work together. They build up to a particular pattern memory. This thing I've been telling you about, they build, and then I said, let it run. Just leave it alone and let it run. What you see is something very interesting. They work really hard together. They make the correct body. Then it sort of stays that way as they defend it. Then it falls apart and it begins to degrade. What's interesting is that in our simulation, there was no evolution for a limited lifespan. There was no noise. There was no damage. Everything was perfect. Still it degraded. Why would it do that? I had this interesting thought and I'll back into it this way. Just imagine this. Like that standard Judeo-Christian version of heaven. You get to heaven. Your pet snake and your dog get to heaven. Everything is great. There's no more damage. There's no decay. Nothing is damaged. Everything is great. Everything is fantastic for the next trillion years. What happens? The snake may be fine doing snake things for every day is the same as every other day. Maybe fine. The dog. Not sure. Probably okay chasing rabbits on the farm. Maybe fine for forever, basically. The human, though. What do you think? What do you think would happen? That's interesting. I'm hearing you correctly. I don't really have a passing through the Perle Gates timeline prediction for the half-life of sanity. But if I'm hearing you correctly, the sort of biological program. I mean, a death I suppose is basically intended to ensure biological death before insanity. Am I mishearing that? So maybe that's not the claim I was going to make, but it's not impossible. Not a claim, but I guess I'm trying to squint and look through the exercise. What I took away from that work that we did was the following. You have a goal seeking system that has met its goal. It's achieved the goal. It made the body was supposed to make the error falls to zero. Everything is great. It hangs out there for a while. But what does a goal seeking system do when there are no new goals? Because we're looking at a system that may or may not be able to give itself new goals. I mean, cognitively, I think we can, but it's not clear yet that this system can do that. And so what we were able to do is we were able to give it new goals by having interventions and going back in and saying, okay, now this is your new pattern. And it will do that. You could call it the boredom theory of aging, basically, not cognitively, somatically. Like if your body cells over a long period of time, they've completed their job. They've created a body during adulthood. But at some point, they start to degrade. The cells don't degrade the collective does. The cohesion, the alignment between them. Because there's no longer a common goal. I mean, this is what makes for an embryo or a body as opposed to just a billion independent cells. Is there all a line towards the same set point? So it's the same goal. And so when that isn't there, regeneration, repair, maybe remodeling becomes something else. I don't know how, maybe you need to sort of change up the body every once in a while. That's also a possibility. Plenary are immortal. And the plenary are the flatworms who are talking about earlier. The flatworms. Yeah, they're immortal. Every two weeks, they rip themselves in half an regenerate. So they give themselves a challenge every two weeks. And so they've been that way for half a billion years or so. I think that we can see evidence of this. For example, if you look at, there's a way to look at the age of certain genes, the evolutionary age of genes to see like when did they show up. The gene expression of a young person, all the different tissues have the same idea of what evolutionary stage they are, meaning an, you know, a human. When you look at old tissue, this is something we just published recently, when you look at, we call it, adivistic dissociation. When you look at the tissues of old age, the genes that they express start to close backwards in evolution and they're discordant that are out of sync. Your liver versus your neurons, they may all have different, start to get different ideas in terms of the genes they express of, of where on the evolutionary tree they are. So again, that disc, right? It's like starts to float off. And in the absence of a compelling set point or goal state, all the subunits start to sort of float off and do their own thing. And this is, I think, an important component of aging. So if you were put in charge of the lack of a better term, the Manhattan project, a trial initiative related to aging, right? That was your sole directive was to really do a deep dive with the intention of developing some type of therapeutic for humans. What might that look like? I mean, for all the sense of purposes, infinite funding, but you have the resources, you can get the talent. Where would you take it if you had a similarly pressing deadline? I'm not asking for the impossible, but if you had a reasonably tight deadline by which you needed to try to come up with something. Where would you take it? How do you think about it? Tight deadlines for aging are tough because you're not going to know for decades in the light, whether you're the works, right? Yeah, yeah, right. No, but I get the idea. This is what I would say. Fundamentally, I think that aging, cancer, birth defects, lack of regenerative repair throughout our lifespan. All of these kinds of things are downstream of one fundamental pressure point that if you solve that, all of these things get solved by side effect. And that is regeneration. More specifically, that in turn is everything there hangs on the cognition of groups of cells. In other words, how do groups of cells know what to build, when to stop, how do we communicate with them, and what kind of intelligence do they have? And I'm being very specific about this. This is when I say they have intelligence, I don't mean complexity. I don't mean some sort of linguistic project where I'm going to take ill things that are beautiful and fascinating. And I say, well, that's the intelligence of life. That's not what I mean. I'm using a very specific definition of intelligence, which is what behavior science issues, which is problem solving memory, different degrees of a cognitive light cone, of goal directed the size of your goals, things like that. So specifically, figuring out what are the competencies of the living material that we're made of, and how do you communicate new goals to them? There are lots of amazing people in the aging field doing interesting things, and that's cool. We had a lot of money specifically for aging. I would put everybody on that question. I would say you're not studying aging, which your studying is the goal directedness of multicellular systems, figure out how they know what to do, and how we communicate goals to them. If you solve that, all of these other things get taken care of as a side effect. What might an example or sample new directive be to give human cells or groups of cells a new goal? What might that new goal look like? I'll give you an example, and then we can talk about what the human case might look like. What we can do is we can take a frog embryo and induce a particular electrical pattern somewhere in the body that we already know that pattern codes for make an eye. That's how the other cells interpret that pattern. It means make an eye. Very interesting in the sense that we don't have to say which cells do what? We don't have to say which genes you need to turn on. These are all micro level details. We don't need to worry about them because the material is competent. Just like when I'm talking to you, I don't need to worry about how your synaptic proteins are going to, you know, leave it. You're going to take care of all of that, right? All I need to do is give you the prompt and vice versa, and we're having this amazing conversation, but our hardware takes care of all the molecular detail. The same thing here. We provide a biological pattern that says make an eye here and the cells make an eye. Now the first thing that happens, it's interesting. The first thing that happens is there's a battle of worldviews that takes place. We inject a few cells. They tell their neighbors, let's make an eye. The neighbors actually say no, we're supposed to be skin or gut. Don't do it. Sometimes they win and sometimes we win. And so the goal of regenerative medicine is to be as convincing as possible so that you win 100% of the time. But in the cases where we are convincing and we have amazing videos of cells like convincing each other to have different voltages and whatnot, they make an eye. And so what you've done is you've taken a bunch of cells that we're going to be, for example, gut and you've now pushed them to be an eye at a very high level. We don't tell, I don't know how to build an eye. I don't know all the genes that have to be turned on. You do that. I'm telling you something at the level of organs. This is going to be an eye. The eye is of the right size. It has all the right layers to it. It is functional. So you can see out of these like topic eyes. It's really amazing. And so that is an example of giving these cells a new goal. How do I know it's a goal? Because I did not micromanage you to do it. I was not there saying turn on this gene, turn on that gene. I gave you a far off set point, by the way, in a wild space that no individual cell knows anything about. The anatomical space of organ structures. No individual cell knows what an eye is, but the collective does. And they stop when it's done. I don't need to be there to tell them to stop. They stop when it's done. So this is autonomous goal directed activity. It's a navigation of anatomical space. And so we can do this. And we can make everything. We can make portions of the brain. We can make eyes. We can make in some cases limbs. We can make some other structures. So in the human, you could imagine two ways to go. And I don't know which is going to be correct. And we need to do a lot of experiments and mammals to nail this down. One possibility is that it might be enough to simply reinforce the existing human pattern. Every so often you would get like a tune up that reminds all the cellular collectives what we're supposed to look like. That's one possibility. There's another possibility. And I don't know which is correct. I hope the first one is right. But I think it wouldn't be the end of the world if it's the latter. It really does get too boring with the same pattern, meaning that, okay, you can go a few hundred years with the reminding of the standard human pattern. But eventually you have to do something unique. Now the planarie are telling us that actually it's hundreds of millions of years that you can make the same thing. So I'm kind of optimistic that you can do that. But let's say that's not the case. And that's not the case in humans. Maybe you have some number of hundreds of years or whatever of the standard human body plan. But then if you want to keep going, you got to make some changes. What does that mean? Maybe you wanted some wings. Maybe you want some tentacles. Maybe you want a third hemisphere, you know, to crank your IQ. Maybe you want a third eye. Sure, sure, sure. Infrared vision out the back of your head. I don't know. People email me all the time asking for walkings and weird effort. So maybe, maybe at some point, it means that you really got to change things up a little bit. You know, a caterpillar butterfly style. Maybe. Wow. And just to come back to a piece that we covered through the thought exercise of the pet snake, the pet dog, do you think we have evolved to die or to age? I mean, if so, why? What might be a strong man argument for that? There certainly are theories, reasonable theories of why evolution wants you dead. Overall, I think there may well be trade-offs. For example, evolution, you know, would not put a lot of effort into maintaining something, if something else is going to go off and you're going to die anyway, right? So there are these ecological trade-offs. I'll give you an example of something like that. People ask, hey, why can't humans regenerate their limbs the way that, you know, axelots, kind of things like that? And here's a plot with a link nobody knows, but here's a plausible theory, right? Imagine you're an early mammal. You're running around the forest. Somebody bites your leg off. Now you have a high blood pressure. You're going to bleed out. If you don't bleed out, you're going to walk around and grind that thing into the forest floor. It's going to get infected. You're never going to have time to regenerate. What you might do is scar, seal the wound, inflammation so that you might live to fight another day, but you're definitely not going to have time to regenerate the way that an axelotl might, you know, there's a float around in water for three weeks or whatever. So basically what you might say is that evolution just kind of decided that it's not worth it. It's never going to work. And by the way, deer antlers, yeah. Deer antlers are the one amazing mammalian example of regeneration plus the liver. Let me live a regenerate stupid, but deer antlers, it's right, adult, a large adult mammal that regenerates this like huge structure of the rate of regrowth is just incredible, incredible, incredible, centimeter and a half per day of new bone, you know, bone, bone, bone, vascular, your innervation, and you don't put weight on it. It's not load bearing. It's the one appendage that's not load bearing. Why I'm saying that is because you could imagine evolutionary trade offs like that where evolution just didn't bother optimizing for long age. You can imagine that. But fundamentally, I do not believe that we are inevitably mortal. I think that at some point if we knew what we were doing, if we had appropriate regenerative medicine, I don't see any particular reason why we have to age and die. And then you face interesting questions about, for example, mental plasticity. We all know with advanced age, people get a little less plastic mentally, right? That kind of stuff. Is that a hardware problem or a software problem? We don't know. If you had somebody with a physically young brain, you know, at 100, would they be like an 18-year-old in terms of their ability to take on new ideas and focus and pay attention, whatever? Would that still stay? Or is there some kind of a cognitive tiredness that happens that is not a hardware issue? I don't think we know. But we need to find out. So I was going to ask you about computer science and AI and concepts that you would like biologists to learn. Well, let's start there. And then I'm going to ask a question that might destroy any shred of respect that you have for me. I'll save that for after this one. Do any concepts come to mind? Because you certainly have been a lot of time in computer science that you wish you could require biologists to become familiar with or to study. I'm wondering about cross-pollination between disciplines within which you've spent a lot of time. It could go the other way as well. And this could be concepts from developmental biology or biology writ large that you think computer scientists should pay more attention to. But does anything come to mind for either of those? My original background is in computer science. Computer scientists are amazing generally at compartmentalizing, coarse graining, modularizing, hiding details and asking, okay, but what's there actually important here? And black boxing things. Biologists generally think everything is important. And if you ask a biologist, you'll get a list of 30 genes and these are hard-won details. They're all important. But a computer scientist is like, okay, but what is that actually doing? And that's really important. The most basic thing is this issue of reprogrammability. Is that understanding that certain kinds of hardware is reprogrammable and why that I think is really key. The other thing that I wish, and there's not really time, unfortunately, for almost any biologists to do this. But one thing I really love for my students to do if they can is to take a course in programming languages. And here's why not so they could code. That doesn't matter. It's not the coding aspect. What happens in a typical course of programming languages that, so let's say in a single semester, you'll spend three weeks doing different languages. And the thing about those languages, and maybe this is true of some human languages as well, but it's definitely true of computer languages, is that each language is a different way of looking at the world. You start off with something that makes sense and you're like, ah, step by step, you sort of tell it what to do. Okay. And then all of a sudden, bam, now there's this other thing where every piece of data, this is a language called list where every piece of data is also instructions and you can execute any piece of data. Like what? And then you get into the other thing and it's functional programming. Now there are no variables. You don't get to have any variables. You have to, like, everything is just a function called. And every time you do this, it sort of rips the foundation of your world out from a new and it says, this universe works in a very different way than you thought before. Forget everything you knew before. Now you got to do this. And how you're going to solve this problem. Now there's recursion or now there's no global variables or whatever. And what it's really good for is that mental plasticity that reminds you that the way you think things are and the tools you think you have are not the only things in town. And so when you do that in a lightning and you have to get things go fast and then the final exam comes and that's this other thing you've never seen before. Being able to do that quickly, I think is super valuable. And I would love that to be more known in biology. But the final thing I'll say is, and this is, I think this is true, but just to be clear, this is very controversial and almost nobody else thinks this is true. So, you know, who knows? But the interesting thing that a lot of people, not just biologists, but a lot of people think is something like this. There's something going on with humans, maybe other animals where biochemistry does not tell the whole story. You read the biochemistry textbook and you say, okay, that's cool. But there's something about my mind and my ability to solve problems in abstract spaces and my inner perspective and all this stuff is just not captured in these low level details. So that's a little disturbing and so on. But what is that then if it's not captured in the chemistry, like where is that coming from? But don't worry, we have this other thing over here, which are machines, dumb machines, dead matter, dumb machines, algorithms, computers, and those things do only exactly what the algorithm tells them to do. They are perfectly captured by a formal model. So we have a formal model of chemistry and the rules of chemistry. And that we think does not capture all what it is to be an entire full on human. But we have these other formal models of touring machines and programming and code and mechanics. And those things capture exactly what the machines do. Those get the whole thing. I think, and this is the part that's very controversial and not a widely shared opinion. I think that's false. I think our formal models never capture all of what's going on and some of the craziest stuff coming out of our lab recently is showing how much, even in very simple sorts of machines, how much interesting novelty, not just complexity, not just unpredictability, but things that any behavioral sciences would recognize as some kind of a proto-cognitive capacity, shows up in even minimal systems where you don't expect it. And so what I'd like the biologists to sort of eventually, once we can show this widely, biologists to understand is that biological systems are amazing and awesome. But it's a kind of a larger degree, not kind of what's already going on in inanimate systems. This is also kind of a crazy claim is that I think the circle, if you make a circle of cognitive things and living things, I think cognition is wider than life. I think cognition predates life and I think it's bigger than life. And normally people do that the other way around. They say, here's the inanimate universe. Some chunk of that is living and some tiny piece of that is intelligent. I think that's exactly backwards. That's something we need to understand both on the biology and the non-computer science end is like, is there a distinction between what people commonly think of as living things and machines? Like, are there any actual machines in the sense that we like to think that there are, you know? That's a deep set of questions for both fields in the future. Just a quick thanks to our sponsors and we'll be right back to the show. Many of you know how deeply I love Japan and it's culture of unwavering dedication to craft, refinement, commitment to continuous improvement, but why do I bring this all up? Well the same focus on improving one thing over the span of years is found in today's sponsor, AG1. They're now unveiling AG1 next gen. The same single scoop once a day product that I use myself, but now with more vitamins, more minerals and five new clinically studied probiotic strains shown to support digestive and immune health. AG1 is also NSF certified for support, one of the most rigorous independent quality and safety certification programs in the supplement industry. So check them out. Subscribe today to try the next gen of AG1. Visit drinkag1.com slash Tim to get three AG1 travel packs, three AGZ travel packs and vitamin D3 plus K2 free in your welcome kit with your first subscription order. This drinkag1.com slash Tim. I wanted to take the opportunity as promised to destroy any credibility I might have with you in my audience. I'm going to try to give myself some air cover by going back, sorry to drag you into it, Kevin, but Kevin Tracy and also actually years before my interview with Kevin, one with Martin Rothblatt. And in both cases, Martin is just an incredible polymath on a lot of levels. People should look into Martin. But we were chatting, Martin and I about a transorricular stimulation of the vagus nerve. And there's quite a bit of mechanistic debate around this. How many fibers are you hitting? Is it actually possible to do through the skin, etc. It's a fight to say the clinical outcomes of certain types of placement of certain types of currents with on the ear seem to produce pretty dramatic anti-inflammatory effects. So then that raises the question for me of wait a second. Do those maps I've seen in Chinese medical offices have anything to them? Now chatting with Kevin, he's like, well, funny thing about that is that it was a French man who actually put that together after taking a ballpoint pen and pressing on patients ears and then it made its way back to China. I don't know the full history. But as we're talking about bioelectricity, I have to ask and again, this might be a dead end. But if you look at traditional Chinese medicine, I went to two universities in China and took a pretty close look at this at the time in 1996. But is there anything to Moridian's Chi? Did they get anything right or was it just coincidence? Is there really nothing defensible to it? I'm just wondering if there's any overlap. I was wondering how wild you were going to get that question like where that was going to go. That's not too bad. Okay. I don't know the epidemiological data on acupuncture and how it works in clinical trials or any of that stuff. I don't know. What I do know is that there's a guy in Boston called Tom Tam. I've known him since the 80s. My whole life since I was a kid. He's treated me. He's treated my family. I've seen people advance cancer patients in his clinic. Don't know anything about the wider epidemiological aspect of it. To me, as someone who's interested in practical results, I can't say anything other than 100% that I think there's something very powerful here, very significant. The next question is what are those Moridians and do they have any functional overlap with the bioelectricity that we're talking about? I don't know. I actually had back in 2006, I think we had a little bit of a collaboration with the New England School of Acupuncture to try to figure that out. I wanted an animal model. I wanted to see if we can do a frog model of acupuncture or something and so on. It didn't work for a number of reasons. If I had to guess and I don't know, right? The real answer is I don't know. But if I had to guess, what I would say is that whatever it is that acupunctures are managing with their treatments, it has the same relationship to the bioelectricity that the bioelectricity has to the chemical signaling. In other words, chemical, physical, protein, signaling, pathways, bioelectrical state, there's some other informational state. Maybe it has to do with a biomechanics of tissues and again, like disclaimer, I still get acupuncture. Vanessa Grimes here in Beverly, I still every month, I get a tune up. I think it really works. So take it all with a grain of salt. But I don't think they're managing bioelectricity directly. I think they're managing something else, which is no doubt relevant to the bioelectric layer because it then has to transduce through that to the rest of the body. But I suspect it's not bioelectricity per se. I suspect it's something additional. That's a guess on my part. Yeah. Cool. I'm glad I asked. Thanks for answering, too. On the acupuncture side, I don't get a whole lot of acupuncture. And you can look at sham studies and so on where, yes, in the case of, for instance, one of my PT's in Texas, you can use something called dry needling instead for muscle spasms. That's very, very effective. But then you can also conversely look at data in, say, canines or pain control and animals where as far as we know, the SIBO is going to be pretty tough to defend. Well, maybe. I guess you tell me, maybe not, or surgery with, I mean, this is probably not the right term, but sort of anesthesia via acupuncture. Also pretty interesting. Right. So I don't know where to take that. I don't have any domain expertise. But it continues to be interesting, I suppose, and also pregnancy data acupuncture for conception, which may intersect with vagus nerve stimulation, who knows. The deal with placebo, like I don't see placebo as a confound. I mean, it can be if you're trying to calculate certain things, but I think it's kind of the main show in a lot of ways. And some of the placebo research like Fabrizio Benedetti is one of my favorites. And he has a talk where he says words and drugs have the same mechanism of action. And it's amazing because he actually does the experiments of giving patients drugs that he tells them what they are. And then he looks at molecular markers in their blood and then they're, you know, in their cells. And yeah, they turn on the downstream, like, yeah, except that they didn't get any of the drug. So there's something very interesting going on here. And we already know if I were to come here and tell you that, hey, did you know that with the power of my mind alone, I can electrically depolarize like up to 30% of the body. I'd say, what is that yoga mind matter? Like, what kind of thing is that? And say, no, it's voluntary motion. We do it every day. So it's an amazing thing that nobody talks about. Like think about this. You wake up in the morning. You have these very abstract high level goals. You have social goals, financial goals, research, like whatever. And in order for you to do any of that, you have to get up out of bed. So what has to happen is these incredibly high level abstract intent has to change the way that calcium and potassium ions go across your muscle cell membranes. These abstract mental things have to change the chemistry of your body cells. We know that's true. That's every time you lift your arm up or you take a step voluntarily, that is what's happening. So we know that works. So with that works, why is it so bizarre to think that our other mental states might not affect either through the electrical transduction of the nervous system or through other non-neural biodelectricity or through other pathways yet could affect ways that other cells act. It doesn't seem weird to me at all. It seems like it would have to be that way. But what we need to figure out is how it works and how to communicate. I think that's an incredibly powerful. If acupuncture is some kind of entry point into figuring that out great, it's not a confound it's a feature. I totally agree with the placebo not necessarily being a confound as you mentioned, depending on what you're optimizing for measuring and so on, which bit as someone who's funded a lot of basic science and clinical research involving psychedelic compounds, which are just notoriously difficult to blind. It's like, yeah, I give someone a meganose and niacin plus x, y, and z or riddle in or something like that. But generally the control group knows that they're the control group. But that doesn't invalidate the research, right? It just points out maybe some methodological revision or tweaking that might be helpful. There's something else here that's really interesting. I haven't seen anybody in the field. Maybe you know folks that have looked at it. A lot of times, at least what I understand in some of Fabrizio's data, both for the efficacy and for the side effects, because there's the no seaball effect, right? They start, oh, yeah, definitely like headache or whatever. But what's interesting is to me anyway, is that like if you're a scientist and I tell you that, okay, I just gave you an SSRI, you may know what the downstream steps are going to. If you're a regular person off the street, participating in this study, how do you know what the actual consequences should be? That's the wild part, right? Like how do you actually implement the instructions? That's right. And I think animal studies should actually be very, this is how we got here, talking about animal placebo, because there are studies in experimental effects in animals where there are whole books on this, where you do, you know, in behavioral science, they do these experiments on rats. And whatever the experimenter believes is what the rats end up doing. They don't need to understand the placebo. They're going to do it anyway if the experimenter believes it, right? So trying to understand some of these subtle cues and influences and how does your body know things I think is super interesting? Okay. I can't let that one go. So what do you think is actually happening there between the experimenter and the rats? Maybe it is just a subtle body language, et cetera, that's being transmitted to an animal who's proceeding that. That seems like a stretch, even as I say it, but I don't know what the alternative explanation would be. What do you think? What might be a theory or two for what is actually happening? I don't have a theory, but I will mention some things to think about. One of the remarkable things that living systems are good at is in credit assignment, in selective attention. So for example, there's this old work on biofeedback from I think the 70s where they can show that a rat can generate of temperature difference of a few degrees Celsius between its ears if you're reward for that. It doesn't take years of practice. It's pretty quick. Just think you're a rat. You just got some reward. Let me see. Well, my tail was pointing north and my whiskers were vibrating and my gut was doing this and my toes were like, what the hell did I just get rewarded for? You would think, and this in computer science is called the frame problem because trying to get robots and AI's to focus on the important thing. There's an old, I forget who did this example, but imagine there's a robot and it's in a room with a bomb. The robot says, oh, there's a bomb. I get to get out of here and it leaves except the bomb was on a cart that was connected to the robot. It goes with him and of course he blows it. What is the next robot? It may be dandana. I don't remember. The next robot is like, okay, we have to have them consider all the options. Now this robot, he goes in, there's the robot. Let me see. The walls are pretty vertical and the paint is dry. It's a 90 degree angle. By the time it's considered all these things, it blows up again. That's no good. Biologicals are amazing at knowing what to pay attention to, what was I just rewarded for, what was the thing I did which I'm never going to do again which turned out poorly. We don't know how that works and that I think is going to be a major part of that puzzle that you're asking about. I'll just give you an example from our work, Flatworms. Again, Plenary. We put Plenary in a solution of Barium. Barium is a non-specific potassium channel blocker. It blocks all the potassium channels. That makes it very hard for cells to do their physiology, especially the neurons freak out. Their heads explode. Literally overnight, their heads explode. But as it turns out, so it's called deep progression is a way to put it, but basically the cells just explode right away. It's in deep progresses. But what we found is that negative treatment, like special ops assassination. It's just a negative treatment. Yeah, basically it's a deep progression here. But here's the amazing part. So you take the part that's left, the tail and the mid body. You leave it in the Barium. And within about 14 days, they grow a new head. And the new head doesn't care at all about the Barium. No problem whatsoever. The new head is fine. Does it? How is this possible? So what we did was a very simple-minded experiment. We took all the genes that are normal head expresses. And for sure, this doesn't have to be in the genes. It's just a simple thing we did to start with. And what genes does the Barium adapted head express? And we found less than a dozen genes that make the difference. Now think about this. Plenary, you don't normally see Barium in the wild. You don't have an evolutionary response to what happens when I get hit with Barium. You're sitting there. I view that you have something like 20,000 genes. You're hit with this new stressor that you've never seen before. How do you know which of those 20,000 genes are going to help? I always visualize this as you're sitting in one of those nuclear reactor control rooms, right? There's buttons everywhere. The thing's melting down. You don't have time to start flipping switches sort of randomly. You'll be dead long before that. How did they zero in on the correct 12 things out of a space of 20,000 dimensions? It's a very high-dimensional search problem. We don't know. Nobody knows. And that aspect of it, biology, finding solutions to problems they haven't seen before, knowing what's salient, figuring out what to pay attention to. There are aspects here that we haven't even come close to replicating in our engineering technologies. I think it's going to be part of all that. This is a pretty close hop to a term that has very specific meaning for you. It may not be the right term for me to use, but cognition. Let's talk about human cognition in the way that most people would think about it. We have this big ball of fat inside our skulls. A bunch of magic seems to happen. And we've got these amazing tools. We've got these MRIs, PET scans, EEGs, and so on. We can use to try to study the brain and what's actually happening. My question is not to be labor this type of question, but it's just a forcing function for conversation. It's sort of 10 years out, 10 years from now, how the textbooks and textbooks may or may not even exist at that point. But how the teaching of neuroscience might have fundamentally changed as it relates to cognition. Because I look at, for instance, funding a lot of neuroscience over the last 10 years, it's like, okay, sometimes the scientists are attracted to whatever the fanciest tools might be. There's some procedure that they produce a lot of beautiful images. You can slice and dice the data from a single study, 15 different ways, and get a lot of publications. And this is not something I could kind of technically defend. I'm left feeling as a lot of people do that there's something missing. It's not quite capturing the full picture pun intended. Not just with the MRIs, but with a lot of these tools that we're using. And I'm bringing this up because of the comment you made about the gap between the biologics and current engineering. And this certainly relates to AI and so on. But I don't have the technical chops to understand quantum effects. But if I think about some of the cursor reading I've done about quantum effects and all faction, let's just say, right, smell. I'm just left wondering what we might be missing fundamentally about how cognition works. And also ties into not turn this into my own TED doc. I'll try to wrap this up in a second. But having conversations with my friend Kevin Kelly, who's the founding and editor of Wired Magazine, who's an avid beekeeper, and about just the collective memory of hives and properties that you would never be able to predict. And I'm not entirely sure you can at least at this point engineer from the ground up. But how do you think our view of cognition, thinking mind might change in the next five ten years? I want to talk about two things. One of which I'm pretty sure is going to be very different in that time frame. And another thing which is more fundamental that may take longer or may not. The one thing that I think for sure is going to change is that there's a thriving emerging field out there now called diverse intelligence. And this is the idea that biology and as I've been pushing it also non biology has been doing intelligence of different kinds long before brains and neurons appeared. It's been solving problems navigating spaces, having memories, anticipating the future long before neurons appeared. The biggest barriers to this are these ancient categories that we got saddled with from pre-scientific times. This idea that everything is binary, people ask, is it intelligent? Is it conscious? That binary framing has been holding everything back for a really long time. Is it holding it back because it's bifurcated between inanimate and animate or is it something else? It's the idea that it obscures the fact that we don't have a good story of scaling, just two quick examples. When you go to court, there's this notion of an adult, okay? We all know if you really think about it, nothing happens on the night of your 18th birthday, like literally nothing. And that's a, and b, we don't actually have a good story of a scientifically grounded story of what does it mean to have personal responsibility? How does that change over time? How is it impacted by neurotransmitters, brain tumors, twinkies, these society? Like whatever. We don't actually have those questions answered, but you've got to get traffic court done or whatever. And so we've just decided we're going to have this thing called adult. We're going to clock it on the 80. The car rental industry actually does better because they look at statistics and they'll say, no, actually it's 25 is when you're like more fully cooked is when you can rent a car. And so they do a little better, but regardless, and we all say it's an adult. And so what those kind of binary terms do is they obscure the fact that, yeah, but underneath we actually still don't have a proper understanding of what's going on. And so by saying that something is or isn't intelligent, what you're basically assuming is that somewhere some developmental biologists can tell you what happened from the time that you were in Oocyte, a little blob of chemicals that presumably was well handled by biochemistry and physics. And then eventually, well, now you're the subject of physiology. And then eventually you're the subject of developmental biology. And then, oh, look, now you're the subject of behavior science. Oh, wait, psychoanalysis. Each of us made that journey. It's a smooth, continuous journey. Developmental biology offers no support for this idea that somewhere there's a flash of light and that, okay, now you used to be just chemistry, but now you've got a real mind. Like that never happens because here's the other thing they do. If I were to say that it's a continuum, if cognition is a continuum from the most primitive passive matter to humans and above, what I could say is I'm going to take some tools from behavioral neuroscience and I'm going to apply them to all kinds of weird things and see how that works out for me. And that's how we're going to know what's cognitive and what's not. And this, in fact, is what my lab is doing. That project is very disruptive and there are a lot of people who really think that's crazy because what they will say is, look, it's a category error. Brains and humans think, cells and tissues can't think. How do you know? Well, because the way the word is defined, so what they've done is they've taken something that actually should be an empirical experimental science, take the tools and see where they give you benefits in way they don't. But instead, they've made it into a philosophical or linguistic project where these ancient categories that we got settled with, oh, don't make a category error, you know, that kind of thing. So I think it's very disruptive. So I think what's going to happen in the future is that all of the applications now that are coming out from active matter research, from basal cognition, from work in slime molds and single cells and materials with learning capacity and all this stuff, we're going to realize, I think this is, you know, again, one of these claims, I think that, we're going to realize neuroscience is not about neurons at all, okay? And then what neuroscience is really about is cognitive glue. Neuroscience is the question of what kind of architectures add up to larger scale minds from aligned, simpler components. Now, neuroscience has a lot to teach us about that because that's basically what they've been studying. But I think the majority of them, not everybody, because we have all kinds of collaborators in this field who are doing something else. But the vast majority of traditional neuroscience think they're studying neurons, that this is something unique to the cellular systems that they're studying. I think this field of diverse intelligence combines artificial intelligence and engineering and cybernetics and evolutionary biology and AI and exobiology, right? And the search for alien life, like all of these things are together asking what are actually the common threads of being an agent, no matter what your origin story, whether you were designed or evolved or, you know, engineered or evolved, or whether you were made of squishy proteins or whether you were, you know, made of silicon or something else, right? Like I think science fiction prepares you for that nicely, for that kind of stuff to really have a broader conception of it. And so I think really understanding what neuroscience is actually about, I think, is going to be a massive change. And the final thing I'll say is in this, I don't know how long it's going to take to, hopefully not that long. But you might remember this story that at one point, I think in the late 1800s, I think was Lord Kelvin who said that, yeah, physics is, you know, kind of done. There's just like these two black clouds or something, but mostly it's just about like more digits past the decimal point, right? But they like these two clouds, you know, and the two clouds basically, you know, became quantum mechanics, right? And relativity and all of that. And so I think neuroscience has a couple of black clouds. And I'll just describe one of them, Karina Kaupman and I, she's an amazing, she started as a high school student working with me remotely. We just did a review of this clinical cases in humans of normal or above normal IQ while having very minimal brain volume. Yeah, I'm sure you've heard some of these cases, but there are many to look at. Now, it's not that you can't add a bunch of epicycles to standard neuroscience and somehow try to squeeze these things into the mainstream paradigm. Maybe you can, but to me, the most important thing is that it doesn't predict that that should be possible. There's nothing we learn that at least that I've ever seen in neuroscience courses that tells you that, oh, and by the way, yeah, you should be able to do all this with like less than a third of the brain volume of a chimpanzee. So there's something going on here, which I think is really fundamental. It's one of these observations that you can try to sweep under the rug, but I think it's actually telling you that we have some very seriously wrong assumption somewhere in the theory. It's exciting. It's super exciting. I've looked at some of that research or in some cases brain adaptations around severe injury and they just raised a lot more questions than we can currently answer. This could be a quagmire I'm about to create, but I'm going to take a stab at it anyway. A lot of people talk about consciousness maybe in the same way that people argue about God without defining it very well, but then even the best intentions to define it can end up slipping on banana peels. But I am curious. You've spent time with Daniel Dennett, who I think you mentioned a little bit earlier. We're talking about, and I think you can keep most people probably on the same page when you're talking about intelligence as very carefully defined in a specific way. I'm paraphrasing here from memory. I apologize if I get it wrong, but goal seeking systems that maybe can satisfy those goals in multiple ways. Maybe this is kind of a long William James lines. Feel free to fact check that. But I'm wondering where you go from there or how you think about consciousness. If you do it all, maybe that's just one of those terms. It's like, well, it's like success or happiness. It's like so poorly defined. I don't spend a lot of time thinking about it because it's a dead end. But if that's not the case, how do you think about consciousness? Because as you're talking, and some people may have been thinking this, they're like, well, wait a second. Is Micah panpsychist? Is like, where are we going here? Yeah. I'm some sort of super panpsychist or something. I don't think it's unimportant. I think it's a very important question, a big picture. Like I think it's really important. I'm not a consciousness researcher. And in my lab, we haven't done pretty much any experiments on consciousness. So I want to preface everything I'm about to say by saying that, first of all, this is not something I typically work on. And the reason I don't work on it right now, and I do have some stuff cooking, but it's sort of not ready yet for public consumption. The reason I don't focus on it now is that there's so much that can be done without delving into that, with a third person perspective on observable problem solving, cognition. And even that has been such a slog. I've been at this for now, 20 years, and it's been so difficult to get people to shift in that way that I don't need to get into consciousness to do the things that I need to do now. Nevertheless, and so that practical sort of strategic reason I haven't been talking about it, except for when people ask. And so if you ask, I would say that for the purposes of defining what we're talking about now, I would say simply something like first person perspective of the kind that makes my toothache really quite different in import than anybody else's toothache. There's something about my toothache that's quite different than when other people, like it's terrible when other people have a toothache, but there's something different when I have it. And so that's I think the kind of thing that we're talking about here, right? Here's what I would say about it. First of all, I really can't understand how anybody can maintain a binary view about this, both on an evolutionary scale and on a developmental scale. If you think you are conscious, and I realize that some people don't even think that, but let's assume that we think that we are conscious, you have to tell me when that showed up in development, development is slow and gradual. Either the OSI had something that got scaled up in some way, and then what we really always is a story of scaling, which is what I think, or some sort of people will say phase transition. And that's a fine hypothesis. You have to show me what the phase transition is and why I can't zoom into it, because the nice thing about those graphs that goes like this is that if you just stretch the horizontal axis, they all become smooth and flat eventually. What exactly happened that you weren't conscious and then you began? Like I think that's a total non-starter. So I think the question about consciousness is what kind and how much do let's just start there? And then I would say that there are roughly four reasons why people give each other the benefit of the doubt about consciousness, right? So the problem of other minds, how do I know if it's your conscious? Yeah, there's usually about four types of reasons that people give. What I can say is that if you like any of those reasons for any of those four reasons, you should take very seriously. For example, the idea that other organs in your body have their own consciousness. For those exact same reasons, for the same reason we can dive into it if you want, but for the same reasons that you and I think each other is conscious, you should take very seriously the idea that there are other parts of your body that are. Now at this point, people usually say, well, that's weird. I don't feel my liver being conscious. Right. Your left hemisphere that's verbal puts up a very nice story about how it's the only one that's conscious. And of course, you don't feel your liver being conscious. You also don't feel me being conscious. That's because you are not that consciousness. But that doesn't mean that there aren't any number of other consciousnesses inhabiting your body. And you would not have primary access to that. And some people disagree, but that's what I think. So I think that we should take very seriously the idea that certainly all kinds of other minimal biologicals have some degree of, I'm not saying, every cell is sitting there having hopes and dreams like we are, but little ones, right? Little tiny ones. That I think I can say reasonably strongly. The thing that is a total conjecture is a following, something that I've said more recently, just this year, I've started talking about this notion of this platonic space. And if you want to talk about that, we can get into it. But I think that in many ways, all the things that we are looking at, so bodies, computers, robots, embryos, biobots, all of those things are in an important sense, thin clients. The front end interfaces for patterns, patterns of behavior patterns of information processing patterns of form and so on, for patterns that come from a different space. They don't come from this physical space. And we can dig into that. If that's the case, then what you could say is, and again, this is not something like this is just conjecturing here. I'm not saying this is useful in the lab yet or anything like that. I like to keep those things separate. But if you have to say something about consciousness, what you might say is that consciousness is, it's the point of view of the pattern projecting into the physical space. In other words, third person observable behavior problem solving, like normal science, is what we see with each other doing within the space. But consciousness is the viewpoint of the pattern that is fundamentally like you and I on that view and many other things are fundamentally patterns that live in this other space. And we sometimes project through various interfaces like physical bodies, robots, androids, whatever, machines, embryos. We sometimes project through these physical interfaces. And consciousness is what it is like, the experience that it is like to be one of those patterns projecting into space. That's one way you might think about it. Could you explain that again as if I'm a smart, sixth grade or very interested in technical stuff? And as I suppose what I'm trying to try and get it on is, are you getting into kind of Donald Hoffman territory of sort of reality as user interface? I'd love to hear you explain the other space, like not coming from physical space, just maybe to put it a different way. I think Don's work is very interesting for the purposes of what I'm allowed to say. We don't need to worry about it. Let's assume a perfectly conventional physics. I think Don's on to something I think for sure. But let's assume that we don't need to worry about that. A perfectly conventional physics. One thing that scientists nowadays like is a view called physicalism. Physicalism says that, look, there's only one realm that we need to worry about. It's this physical realm. Physics tells us everything you need to know about this realm, and there it is. A lot of people like that, but I actually think that view is a non-starter for the following reason. There are all kinds of important facts that are simply not facts about physics. They are not discovered by physicists. They will never be discovered by physicists. They are not changed by anything we do in physics. Those are certain facts of mathematics. For example, the exact value of E, the natural logarithm, the fact that complex numbers behave differently than quaternions that behave differently than octonions. The truths of number theory, certain facts of topology, and the distribution of prime numbers, you can't just dissolve the math department and hope that the don't worry. The physicists will figure out why this is. This is not what they will ever do. The math department does things that are different and additive to what physics does, and both in physics and biology, and I think in cognitive science too, there's an interesting phenomenon, which is that if you're like a five-year-old and you do that thing where you keep asking about why. This is that, but why? If you keep asking about why long enough, eventually you always end up in the math department. It's the damnedest thing. You can imagine. It's a catas, right? They come out every, whatever, 13 and 17 years or something. They come out, right? You say, hey, why is the biologist? They say, why is that? Because that way they don't time their predators. Because if it was every 12 years, then every two year, three or four years, six year predator would get you, right? 13 and 17, like, okay, but that's cool. Why are those numbers so special? They're prime numbers. But why 13 and 17? Why isn't there one in between? Now you got to go to the math department because they're the only ones that understand why that is. It's like this with everything. With physics, you keep digging, but why do the fermions do this or that? Because this amplitude heater has this symmetry group, whatever. There's something interesting going on where even from the basic, most basic math that you learn in high school, up through these very complicated things, there are a bunch of facts that are simply not facts of physics. Now this, I think, is just how it is. Now from here, you have a choice to make. You could say, well, these are just random regularities that are true in our world. It's just a random grab bag of interesting things. Mathematicians don't treat it that way, right? They think it's an ordered structure space that they are exploring. They think they're especially playing as mathematicians. They think they are discovering. They're not inventing. You don't have a choice. You start with set theory. Eventually, you find out the value of E. You didn't have a choice about that. That's what you found out. You discovered that. So I think more optimistically that this is not a random grab bag of stuff. This is some kind of structured space of patterns, mathematical patterns. Now you can take one other step and you say, interesting, how do we know that these patterns are only of relevance to math? Is it possible? You know, there are relevance to physics because they constrain how physics go. What about biology? Biology is interesting. Imagine that there was some planet. And on this planet, the highest fitness blocks to a triangle of a very specific shape. So here comes evolution in a cranks a bunch of generations and it finds the first angle. Cool. And cranks a bunch more generations and finds a second angle. Does it need to do it again to find a third angle? Why no? Because once you know two angles of the triangle, you know the third one. Why did evolution just get to save one third of the time that it would take to figure this out? Why you get a free gift from mathematics? And so I think that physics is what we call things that are constrained by these patterns. Biology are the things that are enabled or facilitated by these patterns. I think biology uses the hell out of these things. And we'll talk about what they are momentarily. But now you say, okay, so the relevant and physics, the relevant and biology, what kinds of patterns are there? Well, there are passive things like the value of E and some fractals and things like that. But it couldn't be that there are other patterns in this space that look a lot like things that are not studied by mathematicians. Maybe they look a lot like things that are studied by behavioral scientists. Could they be patterns that have some capacity for memory or patterns that have capacity for problem solving? Could they be recognizable as kinds of minds? And so this is the kind of crazy claim that I'm making. Maybe the relationship between the mind and the body is exactly the same relationship as between the truths of mathematics and physics. So this is an old idea. A card, for example, in the West is associated with this, that the mind is this non-material thing somewhere. And then, of course, immediately, the princes of Bohemia and other people immediately nailed him on this idea. But how does the interaction happen? How do you have a non-physical pattern making the brain sort of dance like a puppet? Energy conservation laws, how could that possibly work? And I don't think he said this. And I don't know why he didn't say this because he was a mathematician. He could have said, I think, you already have this problem. Since the time of Pythagoras, you have this problem that you have these immaterial truths of mathematics are constraining the physics of our universe. We already have this interaction. This is not new. This has been around forever. This is a kind of interaction where some of these truths that come from a different space of facts absolutely constrain and enable things that happen in the physical world. So one thing you might think about is whether some of these patterns, and we have right now, if anybody is interested, I give you a link to it, we're having this thing I organized called the symposium on the platonic space. And we've got about 26 people. I initially thought it was going to be three people. Me and these two other groups, they turned out to this like 26 people who gave awesome talks about this stuff, talking about this notion. I think it's going to be huge. And I think it has all kinds of very practical implications because what do you get? Well, maybe you get static patterns, but maybe you get dynamic patterns that are more like behavioral policies or even competencies, but maybe you also get compute. And if you get compute, and we can talk about this because we've actually done some experiments on this, if you actually get compute this way, maybe the way we've been totally adding up the cost of computation isn't right because we've been looking at the front end. And I actually think this is what's happening here is that the theories of computation that we have are mostly about the front end interface. And there kind of been neglecting some stuff that happens on the back end. We've just begun. We published a couple of things on it. There's lots more coming. So I think that's an exciting new area that may have all kinds of implications for cognition and behavioral science more generally. All right. So people will definitely be interested in these symposium on the Platonic Space. So we'll include links to that for sure. Separately, lots of things I want to ask you offline that relate to this. But I will say just a confession briefly, which is one of my biggest regrets is that in 10th grade, I and my brother had very different experiences with math. I was very good at math up to that point. My brother also, he had a great math teacher in 10th grade. I had a really, let's call her abusive teacher in 10th grade. I, at that point, retired from mathematics. My brother went on to get a PhD in statistics and has done computer science and data science. And it's to this day one of my biggest regrets that I stopped wild, how these inflection points. Same school, two different teachers. Amazing. Yeah. So never too late, I guess. I wanted to ask you to expand on the compute piece that you alluded to at the end. Could you say more about that? There are two pieces to this that people should know about. One is this idea called polycomputing. And this is something that Josh Bongar and his student who's now a postdoc in my group, Atusa Parse has taken on. It's this idea that when there's a physical event, something is physically happening. It might be current going through a logic gate in your computer or it might be something else like that. The question of what is it actually computing is in the eye of the beholder. So multiple observers could be looking at the same exact physical thing going on and seeing different things being computed. I can go into details. But I'll give you a very simple example of this. And this is a paper that my group put out about a year and a half ago. There are these things called sorting algorithms. And these are very simple sets of rules. They're usually about six lines of code, something like that. There are recipes that you follow. It's an algorithm so you follow the steps. And the idea is your handed a list of numbers and these numbers are all jumbled up. They're out of order, randomly. And the algorithm is designed to sort them so that everything is sorted. You might think of the way if somebody gives you a bunch of names and you need to do a phone book, you want to put them alphabetical, like that, or numbers, like that kind of thing. These sorting algorithms, they have a couple of features. One feature is that they're short. They're fully deterministic, meaning that there's no randomness. There's no question about what to do. You just follow a step by step. That's it, right? And people have been studying them for about 80 years. Every computer science 101 student has to deal with these sorting algorithms. Okay. So what we showed long story short is that if you actually watch what they're doing, yeah, they're sorting numbers. But if you watch carefully and apparently nobody has actually looked and I think this goes back to the thing I said earlier. If you're completely convinced that these things are dumb machines that only do what you ask them to do, why would you look at what else they're doing while they're sorting? And that's exactly this kind of thing where the paradigm that you're using or the formalism that you're using constrains what experiments you do or what you can see, right? Like this matters. So if you're not so sure, as I wasn't, that these things are only doing what you ask them to do, what you find is two general classes of things. One is that the way they do them has extra behavioral competencies, things like delayed ratification, things that a behavioral scientist would recognize that you never coded in the algorithm. You know, because it's not some big hairy like three billion parameter neural net or whatever. It's six lines of code. You can see all the code. You know what is there? Unlike biology, there's no new mechanisms to be discovered like there it is. It's all there. That's why I picked this for the shock value of exactly that that no one could say that, well, there's probably some mechanism that you just haven't found yet. So that's the first thing. And the second thing is that while they are sorting the numbers, which they, of course, they do, they are also doing some other stuff that again, you never asked them to do. And these other things I've called them like side quests. They're like these little side quests. You can also call them intrinsic motivations because like with any system, like with a kid in school, as you were saying, there's things you force them to do. And then within that, within the space in between that, the time they have, whatever, you get to find out what they really want to do. If you don't overdo it, if you give them a little bit of room, you find out that, but what is there, you know, sort of inner nature or there, you get the idea, that kind of thing. So basically what we found is that there is a simple, minimal version of that, even in the most fully deterministic, this is nothing about determinism or randomness or indeterminism. This is the idea that our view of what an algorithm is and how much of what the thing is doing, it captures is incomplete. It captures very well the thing you ask that to do, but it does not provide a good view of, but what else does it want to do? And apparently in a very minimal way, even extremely simple systems have this. Andrea Morris wrote a really good story of the Forbes about all this. That's like, I think, very generally understandable. On my blog, I have a couple of pieces about trying to explain this in a very simple way. The bottom line is this, one observer likes the sorting and you pay for the steps of the algorithm. Of course, every step you do, you pay for it. So you pay for the sorting, but all the other stuff is doing, that's all free because there are no extra steps. You didn't have to do the other steps. It does it while it's doing the other thing. To hear a different observer that's interested in the other thing, they got it for free. And so now the question is, how much of that, I call them inguilded, this is a word that exists ingressions, you know, into the physical world of some of these patterns, how many of them actually are there? And how much extra oomph do you get when you don't know that you got it? And in some cases, that might be great because that might be facilitating things you want to do. In other cases, you might have a machine that has this going on where you don't want that happening. You drive it that not be happening. And we have a very active research for them right now trying to figure out basically better ways to detect it, better ways to facilitate it and waste the suppress it because there will be situations where you don't want this thing to do other stuff. And so that's the question, like, what are we getting? Are we getting free compute here? Are we getting something else? I'm not even sure we have to vocabulary for it yet because that's just not been the way people have thought about these things. So to dig a bit deeper on that, as you develop the vocabulary, the better understanding of how to measure, understand, inhibit or facilitate this type of off-gassing isn't the right term. So like secondary activities. Well, I'm thinking of this technology. I think it's called lamprey, which is this device, the Harvard device they throw on long haul trailers and so on to basically take the exhaust and convert it into something useful. Not the best metaphor for what you're mentioning, but as we flash forward five years or however long it is, I mean, compute is a very pressing problem, right? So there are tremendous incentives. If there were a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, so to speak, with this, if it were even 5% possible that the metas of the world and so on would need fewer vision, let alone like fusion reactors to produce the power they need, then this is of great commercial interest, right? Correct. Intellectual, certainly. What might, and I know I'm asking for some real speculative leaps here probably at this point, but what might that look like in the future for compute within just for the time being, compute within the context of like hyper scalars who are like, okay, we need 20X, the capacity of the current power, but whatever to do what we want to do. Couple things. So first, this is very late breaking stuff. So take everything I say here with a grain of salt, right? We'll see how it shakes out. But I think you're right. I think this is going to have massive implications. And first of all, the off-gassing actually thing is important because one thing about that metaphor, the lamprey metaphor is that there is a main thing that it's doing and then there are these side effects. But what's interesting about polycomputing is that you actually don't know which is the main thing. So I look at this and I say, it's a sorting algorithm and oh my god, it does this other thing we call clustering. Aliens come down, they look at it and they go, oh, that's a cool clustering algorithm. Wait, it's sorts too? Holy crap, right? So like it's important that it's not obvious at all, which is the main thing, right? So let's just say we have a set of things that it does. It's too possibility how it could come out. I think one possibility is that multiple of these are useful as they are and people can sort of siphon off actionable information, valuable utility out of them, how they are. We're certainly investigating that, how to do that. That's one possibility. Another possibility is that there is the thing you've forced it to do. But there's also a bunch of other stuff, which is much more whatever it, quote unquote, wants to do. And that stuff may not actually be what you ever wanted or need it. In other words, there is no guarantee, right? So you have a student and you make them study, you know, math or whatever, something useful, you know, accounting, like you got to get a job or whatever. And then while in my spare time, you know, I make, you know, I don't know, figurines or something. And there is no guarantee that this other thing is ever going to be commercially valuable. It might be really important in understanding the true nature of what you have, but there's no saying that whatever it actually wants, we would find commercially valuable, right? I don't think you can guarantee that. I think it's going to be a combination of both of these things, but the slatter thing has an implication for AI. And the implication is this that when we are looking at a language model, for example, and people are debating, is it this, is it that? I asked that how it was feeling and it told me that it had an inner, you know, world and all of this. Okay, but what we don't know is whether the talking, right, the language use is at all related to what the actual intelligence is in this thing. Maybe, but I'll just say that in our sorting algorithm, the additional thing it's doing is not sorting. It's something else. So it's entirely possible that in these AIs, the thing we have forced them to do, which is to talk, and the thing that we're all obsessed about are the things it says could be a complete red herring as far as what kind of intelligence is actually there. What does it want? How do we communicate with it? The verbal interface that we're all sort of so glued in on might not be the interesting part of that equation. That's my only thing is that is some of this may very well be commercially viable, but some of it may have implications that are very different that are not about the utility of the compute, but about teaching you about what do you really have when you have a system like that? And I think that's where a lot of surprises are coming. Yeah, folks can go back and watch X Machina. But I do want to ask you about sci-fi in a moment, and you're most recommended sci-fi books or films favorites. But before we get there, you know, as this is me just ruminating, and I'm going to apologize in advance for anthropomorphizing, but thinking about the school child example, right, studying math or counting and making the figurines, I wonder if the quote unquote unproductive side activities, in some cases, might prove to be really critical to the forced function in the sense that that student who's studying math needs to let off some steam and do something different in order to have the endurance and periods of focus to actually do the mathematics. So if you split the baby and get rid of the figurine, do you accidentally handicap the main function at the same time? I don't know. That's a great question, and that is exactly what we are studying right now. I have people working on this exact question. And specifically, what is the relationship among the different things that are happening here? Are they living in completely parallel universes such that they don't really touch each other? Or are they entangled in a way that when you mess with one, you're going to have implications somewhere else. We don't know. That's a great question. I don't know the answer to that yet. I'm tempted to chew on that word entangled with you, but that could be probably another two hour conversation. Sci-fi. Meet sci-fi, as I believe you do. I just think it's so powerful in so many ways. Do you have any books, movies, anything at all, essays that are just favorites of yours or that you recommend to students or friends? Well, I grew up on all classic sci-fi from the 50, 60, 70s, that kind of stuff, so all the favorites. One particular author that I love is Lem, Stanislav Lem, L-E-M. I've never read Lem. Oh, he's amazing. So Solaris was his, but also he has a ton of very humorous short stories, like really funny stuff. I like him a lot. He's a master of the absurd and kind of releasing the assumptions that we all have in ways that kind of illustrate how we're narrow thinking and things like that. It's just beautiful. I'll give you two stories that I, short stories that I like. One is they're made of meat by Terry Bison, right? You know, that one's a great one. Yeah, that's a very fast read for people. Yeah, very fast read. It's like a page and it just like reminds us all how silly some of our preconceptions are. There's another one I like, which I'm going to butcher it because I use this example, but I'm sure I've added on things that aren't really, weren't really there. I think it's the fires within by Clark. The version that I have in my head, which probably isn't really close, is the following, but I think it's valuable. Imagine there's some creatures that live in the core of the earth and they come out to the surface. So they're incredibly dense. They're hot. They're incredibly dense. They use gamma rays for, for, for, for, you know, for visual, they come up to the surface. What do they see? Well, everything that we see here that's solid is like a thin gas to them. This isn't solid to them. They're walking through. It's like walking through a garden of, you know, smells that you like, you walk right through, disturb everything. You don't even know what's there. And one of them is the scientist and he says, you know, there's like this thin plasma around the surface of our planet and they go, yeah, he says, yeah, and it's got little patterns in it. And I've been watching these patterns with my instruments and these patterns, they almost look, essentially, almost look like they're doing things. They almost look like they have little lives, you know, they move around and, you know, how long do these patterns stick together? Well, about a hundred years, bad, that's stupid. And nothing, nothing interesting can happen like that. And I have a story on my blog based around this. He says, we are real beings. We are real agents where physical agents, patterns in the gas can't be anything. And so you get the idea. The point is that even the distinction between an agent and the patterns within their cognitive system, right? It's versus thinkers, as William James said, and what's data and what's the machine like all of this to me is a continuum, a very observer dependent continuum. And you can get there with a science fiction story. What fun. You mentioned the blog a few times. You've got some great stuff on the blog. I shared some of your writing in my newsletter before, specifically your advice to students, which has some fantastic advice in it. And for folks who are listening, even if you are not in the world of science and academia, there's a lot in that piece that can recommend it. Where would you suggest people start if they've enjoyed this conversation within the landscape of your blog? Are there like one to three articles you might suggest they start with? I have like a starter pack article and things like that. I can provide some links for sure. Great. Okay. We'll put those in the show notes, folks, as per usual. I bring the land the plan because I know you've got another engagement coming up. But I'll tell you what, I'm going to make it dealer's choice, but in this case, you're the dealer. You can pick which question you want to tackle and then we'll wind up. But super curious what you picked up from the late Daniel Dennett. I have a bunch of his books, really fascinating guy. Option number two is this is a quote from the New Yorker piece in 2021. But this is a congratulatory toast from Clifford Tabin from France. I got to correct. Like, quote, you're the most likely to crash and burn and never be heard from again. You're also the most likely to do something really fundamentally important that no one else on earth would have done that will really change the field. So I'm curious about that first part, especially the most likely to crash and burn, never be heard from again and why that hasn't happened. And I suppose last, and you can answer more than one of these two, but if you could put a giant billboard out in front of, and this is metaphorically speaking, right, just to get a message in front of a lot of people in front of departments of biology or just even more broadly for lots of people to see and understand what that might be. So I'll leave it to you to pick. Hey, you want to? Wow. Yeah. That last one, you know, it's hard because if there's just one billboard, I don't know, there's a lot to choose from. You can have more than one if you want. Well, yeah, I mean, I think that's basically the blog and the, you know, the website and everything. But I'll say just a couple things about the first two, I guess Dan was an amazing person. We agreed on a lot. We disagreed on a lot of stuff. He was always an incredibly generous thinker. One of the great things that he always insisted on was steel manning. This is the idea that if you're going to shoot down somebody's viewpoint or disagree with it, you first need to articulate the absolute strongest version of it that you can. And for people who don't have context, I suppose we should just establish who Dan Dan was. How would you describe him in brief? Philosopher, cognitive scientist, understatement. Yeah. You know, he passed away, I think, in the last year and before that, I think he was widely written about as the maybe maybe one of the most important living philosophers today. I think I've seen that. And yeah, he was a professor at the, by a Tufts where I am and he was a, you know, an incredible thinker and he wrote many, many interesting and popular books and so on. So it's the opposite of straw man, you know, this idea that there's no point critiquing a bad argument. You should be critiquing the best possible version of an argument that you can. And so I think that's extremely valuable is to take the view and understand it so thoroughly that you can give it a really strong defense. And then if you want, go back and then shoot it down after that. But first you got to do the first part. So I thought, I thought that was really important. I guess the second part. So cliff tabin is a great scientist. He's a geneticist. He was my PhD mentor. I did my PhD with him at Harvard. I'm getting old now, getting into retirement. Like at some point, we got to call it which way it's going to be like how, you know, was I don't remember how long ago it was that he said it, but you know, it could still happen. You could still could still crash in burn, I suppose. Why not? Did he say that just because of an entrance, I can tensey that you have? What would lead him to say something like that? I don't want to put words in his mouth. But what I hear him saying is that I mean, I'm very strategic in what I say when, but I don't really have a filter on what I think. No halfway measures. Yeah. Like, like, I, you know, I'm just not very constrained as far as what I'm willing to think and eventually say if I think there's good reason to say it. I think that's what he was talking about. That's a very dangerous thing, right? Because let's face it in science, most of what we say is wrong. And I'm clear on that with people all the time, like I'll say what I think now, and I'll say it as strongly as I possibly can, but I'm under no illusions that we have the right answer to any of these extremely difficult questions. So most of it is probably wrong in some important way. And I think he was just commenting on the fact that I say a lot of things that are counter paradigm and not in agreement with what the mainstream thinks occasionally that goes, well, usually that goes very poorly, which is what I think he was pointing at. Like thank you so much for the time. I really have had so much fun in this conversation. I want to make sure we point people to the right places. I've got a few websites in front of me here, ThoughtForms.live. That's one. We've got Dr. DR Michael 11.org as well. Are there any other websites or profiles that like to point to? Are you active on X or any other platforms? I have, yeah, at DR Michael 11 on X. Yeah, the ThoughtForms.live is the blog. That's my personal blog. So I say things there that I wouldn't put on the website, which is my official lab website. You can sign up for updates on the book and all that kind of stuff. The DR Michael 11.org is the official lab website. So that has all of our papers, all of the software you can download the data sets, like all the stuff to back up, all these crazy things that I'm saying. All of that is on DR Michael 11.org. There are also lists of books that I recommend to my students and things like that. There is a YouTube channel, which also has some conversations I've been for the last, I don't know, five or six years. I've been hitting record on some meetings I've had with some amazing people. So as some really interesting collaborators and all of that is there for you to sort of be a apply on the wall. So that's fun too. The YouTube channel is linked to from ThoughtForms.live. Probably. I'll send you the link. I don't even know if I remember what exactly the URL is. I'll send you the link. So Mike, thank you so much. I hope this is not our last conversation. Absolutely. For people listening or watching, we will link to lots of things. Everything that we can possibly link to from this conversation and more at Tim.logs.sush podcast as per usual, just search Michael 11 or probably 11. I think you might be the only 11. L-E-V-I-N and it will pop right up. We do have plenty of resources to do more digging and more thinking, more assumption testing, assumption bending in a lot of ways. And until next time, as always, be a bit kinder than necessary to others, but also to yourself. Thanks for tuning in. Hey guys, this is Tim again. Just one more thing before you take off and that is five bullet Friday. Would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday that provides a little fun before the weekend? Between 1.5 and 2 million people subscribed to my free newsletter, my super short newsletter, called Five Bullet Friday. Easy to sign up, easy to cancel. It is basically a half page that I send out every Friday to share the coolest things I've found or discovered or have started exploring over that week. It's kind of like my diary of cool things. It often includes articles on reading, books on reading, albums perhaps gadgets, gizmos, all sorts of tech tricks and so on. They get sent to me by my friends, including a lot of podcasts, guests and these strange esoteric things end up in my field and then I test them and then I share them with you. So if that sounds fun, again, it's very short, a little tiny bite of goodness before you head off for the weekend, something to think about. If you'd like to try it out, just go to tim.blogslashfriday. Type that into your browser, tim.blogslash. Friday, drop in your email and you'll get the very next one. Thanks for listening. Life in general can be chaotic, but if you're managing order fulfillment for an e-commerce business, you know that it's own special kind of crazy chaos I've been there. Fortunately, you can relax with today's sponsor, ShipStation. With ShipStation, you never have to worry about shipping and fulfillment again. Whether you're running a business out of your garage as I once did or you have multiple warehouses, ShipStation is for every phase of your business's growth. Save hours and money by automating repetitive tasks and get the best shipping rates from global carriers. ShipStation's industry-leading scalable features help you deliver a better customer experience by ensuring accuracy, faster shipments and automated tracking updates. And with up to 88% off UPS and USPS rates and up to 90% off FedEx rates, it's the most affordable way to ship. So calm the chaos. Switch to ShipStation. Find a free trial at shipstation.com slash Tim. That's shipstation.com slash Tim. So our place reached out to me as a potential sponsor. And the first thing I did was look at the reviews of their products and said, send me one. And that is the titanium always pan pro. And the claim is that it's the first non-stick pan with zero coating. So that means zero forever chemicals and durability that'll last forever. I was very skeptical. I was very busy. So I said, you know what? I want to test this thing quickly. I'm going to test it with two things. I'm going to test it with scrambled eggs in the morning. And then I'm going to test it with a steakser. And it worked perfectly in both cases. And the design is really clever. It does combine the best qualities of stainless steel, cast iron and non-stick into one product. And now our place is expanding this first of its kind technology to their titanium pro cookware sets, which are made in limited quantities. So if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans that outperform everything else in your kitchen, just head to ourplace.com. Save an extra 10% off holiday sale prices on titanium cookware from our place with code save 10 Tim. Head to fromourplace.com to see why more than a million people have made the switch to our place kitchenware. And with their 100 day risk free trial, free shipping and free returns, you can shop with total confidence. Check it out fromourplace.com.
